<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Ancient History of the Egyptians, Carthaginians, Assyrians,
             Babylonians, Medes and Persians, Macedonians and Grecians (Vol. 1 of
             6)</title>
      <author><name reg="Rollin, Charles">Charles Rollin</name></author>
      <respStmt><resp>Translated by</resp><name>Robert Lynam</name></respStmt>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>April 11, 2009</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">28558</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
      <language id="he"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2009-04-11">April 1 2009</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Paul Murray, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Ancient History</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Of The</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Egyptians, Carthaginians,</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Assyrians, Babylonians,</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Medes and Persians,</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Macedonians and Grecians</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Charles Rollin</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Late Principal of the University of Paris</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Professor of Eloquence in The Royal College</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">And Member of the Royal Academy</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Of Inscriptions and Belles Letters</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Translated From The French</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">In Six Volumes</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Vol. I.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">New Edition</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Illustrated With Maps and Other Engravings</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">London</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Printed for Longman And Co., J. M. Richardson,</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Hamilton And Co., Hatchard And Son, Simpkin And Co.,</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Rivingtons, Whittaker And Co., Allen And Co.,</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Nisbet And Co., J. Bain, T. And W. Boone, E. Hodgson,</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">T. Bumpus, Smith, Elder, And Co., J. Capes, L. Booth,</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Bigg And Son, Houlston And Co., H. Washbourne,</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Bickets And Bush, Waller And Son, Cambridge,</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Wilson And Sons, York, G. And J. Robinson, Liverpool,</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">And A. And C. Black, Edinburgh</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1850</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/frontispiece.png' rend='width: 50%'>
    <head rend='text-align: center'>Charles Rollin. Born 1661. Died 1741.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration: Portrait of Charles Rollin.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
[Transcriber's Note: The French original of this work was published 1730-38.
The translation was done by Robert Lynam.]
</p>

</div>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>

<p>
A Letter written by the Right Reverend Dr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Francis
Atterbury</hi>, late Lord Bishop of Rochester, to <hi rend='smallcaps'>M.
Rollin</hi>, in commendation of this Work.
</p>

<p>
Reverende atque Eruditissime Vir,
</p>

<p>
Cum, monente amico quodam, qui juxta ædes tuas habitat, scirem
te Parisios revertisse; statui salutatum te ire, ut primùm per valetudinem
liceret. Id officii, ex pedum infirmitate aliquandiu dilatum,
cùm tandem me impleturum sperarem, frustrà fui; domi non eras.
Restat, ut quod coràm exequi non potui, scriptis saltem literis
præstem; tibique ob ea omnia, quibus à te auctus sum, beneficia,
grates agam, quas habeo certè, et semper habiturus sum, maximas.
</p>

<p>
Reverà munera ilia librorum nuperis à te annis editorum egregia
ac perhonorifica mihi visa sunt. Multi enim facio, et te, vir præstantissime,
et tua omnia quæcunque in isto literarum genere perpolita
sunt; in quo quidem Te cæteris omnibus ejusmodi scriptoribus
facilè antecellere, atque esse eundem et dicendi et sentiendi
magistrum optimum, prorsùs existimo; cùmque in excolendis his
studiis aliquantulum ipse et operæ et temporis posuerim, liberè
tamen profiteor me, tua cum legam ac relegam, ea edoctum esse à
te, non solùm quæ nesciebam prorsus, sed etiam quæ anteà didicisse
mihi visus sum. Modestè itaque nimiùm de opere tuo sentis, cùm
juventuti tantùm instituendæ elaboratum id esse contendis. Ea
certè scribis, quæ à viris istiusmodi rerum haud imperitis, cum
voluptate et fructu legi possunt. Vetera quidem et satis cognita
revocas in memoriam; sed ita revocas, ut illustres, ut ornes; ut
aliquid vetustis adjicias quod novum sit, alienis quod omnino tuum:
bonasque picturas bonâ in luce collocando efficis, ut etiam iis, à
quibus sæpissimè conspectæ sunt, elegantiores tamen solito appareant,
et placeant magis.
</p>

<p>
Certè, dum Xenophontem sæpiùs versas, ab illo et ea quæ à te
plurimis in locis narrantur, et ipsum ubique narrandi modum videris
traxisse, stylique Xenophontei nitorem ac venustam simplicitatem
non imitari tantùm, sed planè assequi: ita ut si Gallicè scisset
Xenophon, non aliis ilium, in eo argumento quod tractas, verbis
usurum, non alio prorsùs more scripturum judicem.
</p>

<p>
Hæc ego, haud assentandi causâ, (quod vitium procul à me abest,)
sed verè ex animi sententiâ dico. Cùm enim pulchris à te donis
ditatus sim, quibus in eodem, aut in alio quopiam doctrinæ genere
referendis imparem me sentio, volui tamen propensi erga te animi
gratique testimonium proferre, et te aliquo saltem munusculo, etsi
perquam dissimili, remunerari.
</p>

<p>
Perge, vir docte admodùm et venerande, de bonis literis, quæ
nunc neglectæ passim et spretæ jacent, benè mereri: perge juventatem
Gallicam (quando illi solummodò te utilem esse vis) optimis
et præceptis et exemplis informare.
</p>

<p>
Quod ut facias, annis ætatis tuæ elapsis multos adjiciat Deus!
iisque decurrentibus sanum te præstet atque incolumem. Hoc ex
animo optat ac vovet
</p>

<p>
Tui observantissimus<lb/>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Franciscus Roffensis.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Pransurum te mecum post festa dixit mihi amicus ille noster qui
tibi vicinus est. Cùm statueris tecum quo die adfuturus es, id illi
significabis. Me certè annis malisque debilitatum, quandocunque
veneris, domi invenies.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>6° Kal. Jan. 1731.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>

<p>
A Letter written by the Right Reverend Dr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Francis
Atterbury</hi>, late Lord Bishop of Rochester, to <hi rend='smallcaps'>M.
Rollin</hi>, in commendation of this Work.
</p>

<p>
Reverend and most Learned Sir,
</p>

<p>
When I was informed by a friend who lives near you, that you were
returned to Paris, I resolved to wait on you, as soon as my health
would admit. After having been prevented by the gout for some
time, I was in hopes at length of paying my respects to you at your
house, and went thither, but found you not at home. It is incumbent
on me therefore to do that in writing, which I could not in
person, and to return you my acknowledgments for all the favours
you have been pleased to confer upon me, of which I beg you will
be assured, that I shall always retain the most grateful sense.
</p>

<p>
And indeed I esteem the books you have lately published, as
presents of exceeding value, and such as do me very great honour.
For I have the highest regard, most excellent Sir, both for you, and
for every thing that comes from so masterly a hand as yours, in the
kind of learning you treat; in which I must believe that you not
only excel all other writers, but are at the same time the best master
of speaking and thinking well; and I freely confess that, though I
had applied some time and pains in cultivating these studies, when
I read your volumes over and over again, I was instructed in things
by you, of which I was not only entirely ignorant, but seemed to
myself to have learnt before. You have therefore too modest an
opinion of your work, when you declare it composed solely for the
instruction of youth. What you write may undoubtedly be read
with pleasure and improvement by persons not unacquainted with
learning of the same kind. For whilst you call to mind ancient
facts and things sufficiently known, you do it in such a manner, that
you illustrate, you embellish them; still adding something new to
the old, something entirely your own to the labours of others: by
placing good pictures in a good light, you make them appear with
unusual elegance and more exalted beauties, even to those who have
seen and studied them most.
</p>

<p>
In your frequent correspondence with Xenophon, you have certainly
extracted from him, both what you relate in many places,
and every where his very manner of relating; you seem not only to
have imitated, but attained the shining elegance and beautiful simplicity
of that author's style: so that had Xenophon excelled in the
French language, in my judgment he would have used no other
words, nor written in any other method, upon the subject you treat,
than you have done.
</p>

<p>
I do not say this out of flattery, (which is far from being my vice,)
but from my real sentiments and opinion. As you have enriched
me with your fine presents, which I know how incapable I am of
repaying either in the same or in any other kind of learning, I was
willing to testify my gratitude and affection for you, and at least to
make you some small, though exceedingly unequal, return.
</p>

<p>
Go on, most learned and venerable Sir, to deserve well of sound
literature, which now lies universally neglected and despised. Go
on, in forming the youth of France (since you will have their utility
to be your sole view) upon the best precepts and examples.
</p>

<p>
Which that you may effect, may it please God to add many years
to your life, and during the course of them to preserve you in health
and safety. This is the earnest wish and prayer of
</p>

<p>
Your most obedient Servant,<lb/>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Francis Roffen.</hi>
</p>

<p>
P.S.&mdash;Our friend, your neighbour, tells me you intend to dine
with me after the holidays. When you have fixed upon the day,
be pleased to let him know it. Whenever you come, you will be
sure to find one so weak with age and ills as I am, at home.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>December 26, 1731.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='i'/><anchor id='Pgi'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<div>
<head>The Usefulness of Profane History, especially with regard to
Religion.</head>

<p>
The study of profane history would little deserve to have a
serious attention, and a considerable length of time bestowed
upon it, if it were confined to the bare knowledge of ancient
transactions, and an uninteresting inquiry into the æras when
each of them happened. It little concerns us to know, that
there were once such men as Alexander, Cæsar, Aristides, or
Cato, and that they lived in this or that period; that the
empire of the Assyrians made way for that of the Babylonians,
and the latter for the empire of the Medes and Persians,
who were themselves subjected by the Macedonians, as these
were afterwards by the Romans.
</p>

<p>
But it highly concerns us to know, by what methods those
empires were founded; by what steps they rose to that exalted
pitch of grandeur which we so much admire; what it was that
constituted their true glory and felicity; and what were the
causes of their declension and fall.
</p>

<p>
It is of no less importance to study attentively the manners
of different nations; their genius, laws, and customs; and
especially to acquaint ourselves with the character and disposition,
the talents, virtues, and even vices of those by whom
they were governed; and whose good or bad qualities contributed
to the grandeur or decay of the states over which they
presided.
</p>

<p>
Such are the great objects which ancient history presents;
causing to pass, as it were, in review before us, all the kingdoms
and empires of the world; and at the same time, all the
great men who were any ways conspicuous; thereby instructing
us, by example rather than precept, in the arts of empire
and war, the principles of government, the rules of
policy, the maxims of civil society, and the conduct of life that
suits all ages and conditions.
</p>

<p>
We acquire, at the same time, another knowledge, which
cannot but excite the attention of all persons who have a taste
and inclination for polite learning; I mean the manner in
<pb n='ii'/><anchor id='Pgii'/>
which arts and sciences were invented, cultivated, and improved.
We there discover, and trace as it were with the eye, their
origin and progress; and perceive, with admiration, that the
nearer we approach those countries which were once inhabited
by the sons of Noah, in the greater perfection we find the arts
and sciences; whereas they seem to be either neglected or forgotten,
in proportion to the remoteness of nations from them;
so that, when men attempted to revive those arts and sciences,
they were obliged to go back to the source from whence they
originally flowed.
</p>

<p>
I give only a transient view of these objects, though so very
important, in this place, because I have already treated them
at some length elsewhere.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Of the Method of Teaching
and Studying the Belles Lettres</hi>, &amp;c. vol. iii. and iv.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
But another object of infinitely greater importance, claims
our attention. For although profane history treats only of
nations who had imbibed all the absurdities of a superstitious
worship; and abandoned themselves to all the irregularities of
which human nature, after the fall of the first man, became
capable; it nevertheless proclaims universally the greatness of
the Almighty, his power, his justice, and above all, the admirable
wisdom with which his providence governs the universe.
</p>

<p>
If the inherent conviction of this last truth raised, according to Cicero's
observation,<note place='foot'>Pietate ac religione, atque hâc unâ sapientiâ quòd
deorum immortalium numine omnia regi gubernarique perspeximus, omnes gentes nationesque
superavimus. <hi rend='italic'>Orat. de Arusp. resp.</hi> n. 19.&mdash;Trans.</note> the
Romans above all other nations; we may, in like manner, affirm, that nothing gives
history a greater superiority to many other branches of literature,
than to see in a manner imprinted, in almost every page
of it, the precious footsteps and shining proofs of this great
truth, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> that God disposes all events as supreme Lord and
Sovereign; that he alone determines the fate of kings and the
duration of empires; and that he transfers the government of
kingdoms from one nation to another, because of the unrighteous
dealing and wickedness committed therein.<note place='foot'>Ecclus. x. 8</note>
</p>

<p>
We discover this important truth in going back to the most
remote antiquity, and the origin of profane history; I mean, to
the dispersion of the posterity of Noah into the several countries
of the earth where they settled. Liberty, chance, views
of interest, a love for certain countries, and similar motives,
were, in outward appearance, the only causes of the different
choice which men made in these various migrations. But the
<pb n='iii'/><anchor id='Pgiii'/>
Scriptures inform us, that amidst the trouble and confusion
that followed the sudden change in the language of Noah's
descendants, God presided invisibly over all their counsels and
deliberations; that nothing was transacted but by the Almighty's
appointment; and that he alone guided<note place='foot'>The ancients themselves,
according to Pindar, (<hi rend='italic'>Olymp. Od.</hi> vii.) had retained
some idea, that the dispersion of men was not the effect of chance, but that they had
been settled in different countries by the appointment of Providence.&mdash;Trans.</note>
and settled all mankind, agreeably to the dictates of his mercy and justice:
<q>The Lord scattered them abroad from thence upon the face
of the earth.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. xi. 8, 9.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is true indeed that God, even in those early ages, had a
peculiar regard for that people, whom he was one day to consider
as his own. He pointed out the country which he
designed for them; he caused it to be possessed by another
laborious nation, who applied themselves to cultivate and
adorn it; and to improve the future inheritance of the Israelites.
He then fixed, in that country, the like number of families,
as were to be settled in it, when the sons of Israel should,
at the appointed time, take possession of it; and did not suffer
any of the nations, which were not subject to the curse pronounced
by Noah against Canaan, to enter upon an inheritance
that was to be given up entirely to the Israelites. <hi rend='italic'>Quando
dividebat Altissimus gentes, quando separabat filios Adam,
constituit terminos populorum juxta numerum filiorum
Israel.</hi><note place='foot'><q>When the Most High divided the nations, and separated
the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the
children of Israel</q> (whom he had in view.) This is one of the interpretations (which
appears very natural) that is given to this passage. Deut. xxxii. 8.&mdash;Trans.</note>
But this peculiar regard of God to his future people, does not
interfere with that which he had for the rest of the nations of
the earth, as is evident from the many passages of Scripture,
which teach us, that the entire succession of ages is present to
him; that nothing is transacted in the whole universe, but by
his appointment; and that he directs the several events of it
from age to age. <hi rend='italic'>Tu es Deus conspector seculorum. A
seculo usque in seculum respicis.</hi><note place='foot'>Ecclus. xxxvi. 17, xxxix.
19.</note>
</p>

<p>
We must therefore consider, as an indisputable principle,
and as the basis and foundation of the study of profane history,
that the providence of the Almighty has, from all eternity,
appointed the establishment, duration, and destruction of kingdoms
and empires, as well in regard to the general plan of
the whole universe, known only to God, who constitutes the
order and wonderful harmony of its several parts; as particularly
with respect to the people of Israel, and still more with
<pb n='iv'/><anchor id='Pgiv'/>
regard to the Messiah, and the establishment of the church,
which is his great work, the end and design of all his other
works, and ever present to his sight; <hi rend='italic'>Notum à seculo est
Domino opus suum.</hi><note place='foot'>Acts xv. 18.</note>
</p>

<p>
God has vouchsafed to discover to us, in holy Scripture, a
part of the relation of the several nations of the earth to his
own people; and the little so discovered, diffuses great light
over the history of those nations, of whom we shall have but a
very imperfect idea, unless we have recourse to the inspired
writers. They alone display, and bring to light, the secret
thoughts of princes, their incoherent projects, their foolish
pride, their impious and cruel ambition: they reveal the true
causes and hidden springs of victories and overthrows; of the
grandeur and declension of nations; the rise and ruin of states;
and teach us, what indeed is the principal benefit to be derived
from history, the judgment which the Almighty forms both of
princes and empires, and consequently, what idea we ourselves
ought to entertain of them.
</p>

<p>
Not to mention Egypt, that served at first as the cradle (if I
may be allowed the expression) of the holy nation; and which
afterwards was a severe prison, and a fiery furnace to it<note place='foot'>I will bring
you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rid
you out of their bondage. Exod. vi. 6. Out of the iron furnace, even out of Egypt.
Deut. iv. 20.&mdash;Trans.</note>;
and, at last, the scene of the most astonishing miracles that
God ever wrought in favour of Israel: not to mention, I say,
Egypt, the mighty empires of Nineveh and Babylon furnish a
thousand proofs of the truth here advanced.
</p>

<p>
Their most powerful monarchs, Tiglath-Pileser, Shalmanezer,
Sennacherib, Nebuchadnezzar, and many more, were, in God's
hand, as so many instruments, which he employed to punish
the transgressions of his people. <q>He lifted up an ensign to
the nations from far, and hissed unto them from the end of
the earth, to come and receive his orders.</q><note place='foot'>Isaiah v. 26, 30,
x. 28, 34, xiii. 4, 5.</note> He himself put
the sword into their hands, and appointed their marches daily.
He breathed courage and ardour into their soldiers; made their
armies indefatigable in labour, and invincible in battle; and
spread terror and consternation wherever they directed their
steps.
</p>

<p>
The rapidity of their conquests ought to have enabled them
to discern the invisible hand which conducted them. But,
says one of these kings<note place='foot'>Sennacherib.&mdash;Trans.</note> in the name
of the rest, <q>By the
strength of my hand I have done it, and by my wisdom; for I
<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>
am prudent: And I have removed the bounds of the people
and have robbed their treasures, and I have put down the
inhabitants like a valiant man. And my hand hath found as a
nest the riches of the people: and as one gathereth eggs that
are left, have I gathered all the earth, and there was none that
moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or peeped.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid.
x. 13, 14.</note>
</p>

<p>
But this monarch, so august and wise in his own eye, how
did he appear in that of the Almighty? Only as a subaltern
agent, a servant sent by his master: <q>The rod of his anger,
and the staff in his hand.</q><note place='foot'>Isaiah x. 5.</note>
God's design was to chastise, not
to extirpate his children. But Sennacherib <q>had it in his
heart to destroy and cut off all nations.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid.
ver. 7.</note> What then will be
the issue of this kind of contest between the designs of God,
and those of this prince?<note place='foot'>Ibid. ver. 12.</note>
At the time that he fancied himself
already possessed of Jerusalem, the Lord, with a single
blast, disperses all his proud hopes; destroys, in one night, an
hundred four score and five thousand of his forces; and
putting <q>a hook in his nose, and a bridle in his lips</q>,<note place='foot'>Because
thy rage against me, and thy tumult is come up into mine ears, therefore
I will put my hook into thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I will turn
thee back by the way by which thou camest. 2 Kings xix. 28.&mdash;Trans.</note> (as
though he had been a wild beast,) he leads him back to his
own dominions, covered with infamy, through the midst of
those nations, who, but a little before, had beheld him in all his
pride and haughtiness.
</p>

<p>
Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, appears still more visibly
governed by a Providence, to which he himself is an entire
stranger, but which presides over all his deliberations, and
determines all his actions.
</p>

<p>
Being come at the head of his army to two highways, the
one of which led to Jerusalem, and the other to Rabbah, the
chief city of the Ammonites, this king, not knowing which of
them it would be best for him to strike into, debates for some
time with himself, and at last casts lots. God makes the lot
fall on Jerusalem, to fulfil the menaces he had pronounced
against that city, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> to destroy it,
to burn the temple, and lead
its inhabitants into captivity.<note place='foot'>Ezek. xxi. 19, 23.</note>
</p>

<p>
One would imagine, at first sight, that this king had been
prompted to besiege Tyre, merely from a political view, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>
that he might not leave behind him so powerful and well-fortified
a city; nevertheless, a superior will had decreed the
siege of Tyre.<note place='foot'>Ibid. xxvi. xxvii. xxviii.</note>
God designed, on one side, to humble the pride
of Ithobal its king, who fancying himself wiser than Daniel,
<pb n='vi'/><anchor id='Pgvi'/>
whose fame was spread over the whole East; and ascribing
entirely to his rare and uncommon prudence the extent of his
dominions, and the greatness of his riches, persuaded himself
that he was <q>a god, and sat in the seat of God.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek.
xxviii. 2.</note> On the other side, he also designed to chastise the luxury, the
voluptuousness, and the pride of those haughty merchants, who
thought themselves kings of the sea, and sovereigns over
crowned heads; and especially, that inhuman joy of the Tyrians,
who looked upon the fall of Jerusalem (the rival of Tyre) as
their own aggrandizement. These were the motives which
prompted God himself to lead Nebuchadnezzar to Tyre; and
to make him execute, though unknowingly, his commands.
<foreign rend='italic'>Idcirco ecce ego adducam ad Tyrum Nabuchodonosor.</foreign>
</p>

<p>
To recompense this monarch, whose army the Almighty
had caused <q>to serve a great service against Tyre</q><note place='foot'>Ibid. xxix.
18, 20.</note> (these are
God's own words;) and to compensate the Babylonish troops,
for the grievous toils they had sustained during a thirteen
years' siege; <q>I will give,</q><note place='foot'>Dan. iv.
1-34.</note> saith the Lord God, <q>the land of
Egypt unto Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon; and he shall
take her multitude, and take her spoil, and take her prey, and
it shall be the wages for his army.</q><note place='foot'>This incident is related more at
large in the history of the Egyptians, under the
reign of Amasis.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
The same Nebuchadnezzar, eager to immortalize his name
by the grandeur of his exploits, was determined to heighten
the glory of his conquests by his splendour and magnificence,
in embellishing the capital of his empire with pompous edifices,
and the most sumptuous ornaments. But whilst a set of adulating
courtiers, on whom he lavished the highest honours and
immense riches, make all places resound with his name, an
august senate of watchful spirits is formed, who weigh, in the
balance of truth, the actions of kings, and pronounce upon
them a sentence from which there lies no appeal. The king
of Babylon is cited before this tribunal, in which there presides
the Supreme Judge, who, to a vigilance which nothing can
elude, adds a holiness that will not allow of the least irregularity.
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vigil et sanctus.</foreign>
In this tribunal all Nebuchadnezzar's
actions, which were the admiration and wonder of the public,
are examined with rigour; and a search is made into the
inward recesses of his heart, to discover his most hidden
thoughts. How will this formidable inquiry end? At the
instant that Nebuchadnezzar, walking in his palace, and
revolving, with a secret complacency, his exploits, his grandeur
and magnificence, is saying to himself, <q>Is not this great
<pb n='vii'/><anchor id='Pgvii'/>
Babylon that I built for the house of the kingdom, by the
might of my power, and for the honour of my
majesty?</q><note place='foot'>Ibid. iv. 30.</note> in
this very instant, when, by vainly flattering himself that he
held his power and kingdom from himself alone, he usurped the
seat of the Almighty: a voice from heaven pronounces his
sentence, and declares to him, that <q>his kingdom was departed
from him, that he should be driven from men, and his dwelling
be with the beasts of the field, until he knew that the Most
High ruled in the kingdoms of men, and gave them to whomsoever
he would.</q><note place='foot'>Dan. iv. 31, 32.</note>
</p>

<p>
This tribunal, which is for ever assembled, though invisible
to mortal eyes, pronounced the like sentence on those famous
conquerors, on those heroes of the pagan world, who, like
Nebuchadnezzar, considered themselves as the sole authors of
their exalted fortune; as independent on authority of every
kind, and as not holding of a superior power.
</p>

<p>
As God appointed some princes to be the instruments of his
vengeance, he made others the dispensers of his goodness.
He ordained Cyrus to be the deliverer of his people; and, to
enable him to support with dignity so glorious a function, he
endued him with all the qualities which constitute the greatest
captains and princes: and caused that excellent education to
be given him, which the heathens so much admired, though
they neither knew the author nor true cause of it.
</p>

<p>
We see in profane history the extent and swiftness of his
conquests, the intrepidity of his courage, the wisdom of his
views and designs; his greatness of soul, his noble generosity;
his truly paternal affection for his subjects; and, on their part,
the grateful returns of love and tenderness, which made them
consider him rather as their protector and father, than as their
lord and sovereign. We find, I say, all these particulars in
profane history; but we do not perceive the secret principle of
so many exalted qualities, nor the hidden spring which set
them in motion.
</p>

<p>
But Isaiah discloses them, and delivers himself in words
suitable to the greatness and majesty of the God who inspired
him, He represents this all-powerful God of armies as leading
<pb n='viii'/><anchor id='Pgviii'/>
Cyrus by the hand, marching before him, conducting him from
city to city, and from province to province; <q>subduing nations
before him, loosening the loins of kings, breaking in pieces
gates of brass, cutting in sunder the bars of iron,</q> throwing
down the walls and bulwarks of cities, and putting him in possession
<q>of the treasures of darkness, and the hidden riches of
secret places.</q><note place='foot'><p>Thus saith the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus,
whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him and I will loose the loins
of kings to open before him the two-leaved gates, and the gates shall not be shut.
</p>
<p>
I will go before thee, and make the crooked places straight: will break in pieces
the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron.
</p>
<p>
And I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places,
that thou mayest know, that I the Lord which shall call <emph>thee</emph> by thy name,
<emph>am</emph> the God of Israel. Isa. xlv. 1-3.&mdash;Trans.</p></note>
</p>

<p>
The prophet also tells us the cause and motive of all these
wonderful events.<note place='foot'>Isa. xlv. 13, 14.</note>
It was in order to punish Babylon, and to
deliver Judah, that the Almighty conducts Cyrus, step by
step, and gives success to all his enterprises. <q>I have raised
him up in righteousness, and I will direct all his ways.&mdash;For
Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel mine elect.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid. 13, 4.</note>
But this prince is so blind and ungrateful, that he does not know his
master, nor remember his benefactor. <q>I have surnamed
thee, though thou hast not known me.&mdash;I girded thee, though
thou hast not known me.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid. 4, 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
Men seldom form to themselves a right judgment of true
glory, and the duties essential to regal power. The Scripture
alone gives us a just idea of them, and this it does in a wonderful
manner, under the image of a very large and strong
tree, whose top reaches to heaven, and whose branches extend
to the extremities of the earth.<note place='foot'>Dan. iv. 7, 9.</note>
As its foliage is very abundant,
and it is bowed down with fruit, it constitutes the ornament
and felicity of the plains around it. It supplies a grateful
shade, and a secure retreat to beasts of every kind: animals,
both wild and tame, are safely lodged beneath it, the
birds of heaven dwell in its branches, and it supplies food to all
living creatures.
</p>

<p>
Can there be a more just or more instructive idea of the
kingly office, whose true grandeur and solid glory does not
consist in that splendour, pomp, and magnificence which surround
it; nor in that reverence and exterior homage which
are paid to it by subjects, and which are justly due to it; but
in the real services and solid advantages it procures to nations,
whose support, defence, security, and asylum it forms, (both
from its nature and institution,) at the same time that it is the
fruitful source of blessings of every kind; especially with regard
to the poor and weak, who ought to find beneath the shade
and protection of royalty, a sweet peace and tranquillity, not to
be interrupted or disturbed; whilst the monarch himself sacrifices
his ease, and experiences alone those storms and tempests
from which he shelters all others?
</p>

<pb n='ix'/><anchor id='Pgix'/>

<p>
I think that I observe this noble image, and the execution
of this great plan (religion only excepted) realized in the
government of Cyrus, of which Xenophon has given us a
picture, in his beautiful preface to the history of that prince.
He has there specified a great number of nations, which,
though separated from each other by vast tracts of country,
and still more widely by the diversity of their manners, customs,
and language, were however all united, by the same sentiments
of esteem, reverence, and love for a prince, whose government
they wished, if possible, to have continued for ever, so much
happiness and tranquillity did they enjoy under it.<note place='foot'>Ἐδυνήθη
ἐπιθυμίαν ἐμβαλεῖν τοσαύτην τοῦ πάντας αὐτῷ χαριζεσθαι, ὤσι ἀεὶ
τ᾽ αὐτοῦ γνώμη ἀξιοῦν κυβερνᾶσθαι.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
To this amiable and salutary government, let us oppose the
idea which the sacred writings give us of those monarchs and
conquerors so much boasted by antiquity, who, instead of
making the happiness of mankind the sole object of their care,
were prompted by no other motives than those of interest and
ambition. The Holy Spirit represents them under the symbols
of monsters generated from the agitation of the sea, from
the tumult, confusion, and dashing of the waves one against
the other; and under the image of cruel wild beasts, which
spread terror and desolation universally, and are for ever
gorging themselves with blood and slaughter; bears, lions,
tigers, and leopards.<note place='foot'>Dan. vii.</note>
How strong and expressive is this
colouring!
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless, it is often from such destructive models, that
the rules and maxims of the education generally bestowed on
the children of the great are borrowed; and it is these ravagers
of nations, these scourges of mankind, they propose to make
them resemble. By inspiring them with the sentiments of a
boundless ambition, and the love of false glory, they become
(to borrow an expression from Scripture) <q>young lions; they
learn to catch the prey, and devour men&mdash;to lay waste cities,
to turn lands and their fatness into desolation by the noise of
their roaring.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. xix. 3, 7.</note>
And when this young lion is grown up, God
tells us, that the noise of his exploits, and the renown of his
victories, are nothing but a frightful roaring, which fills all
places with terror and desolation.
</p>

<p>
The examples I have hitherto mentioned, extracted from
the history of the Egyptians, Assyrians, Babylonians, and Persians,
prove sufficiently the supreme power exercised by God
over all empires; and the relation he has thought fit to establish
<pb n='x'/><anchor id='Pgx'/>
between the rest of the nations of the earth and his own
peculiar people. The same truth appears as conspicuously
under the kings of Syria and Egypt, successors of Alexander
the Great: between whose history, and that of the Jews under
the Maccabees, every body knows the close connection.
</p>

<p>
To these incidents I cannot forbear adding another, which
though universally known, is not therefore the less remarkable;
I mean the taking of Jerusalem by Titus. When he
had entered that city, and viewed all the fortifications of it,
this prince, though a heathen, owned the all-powerful arm of
the God of Israel; and, in a rapture of admiration, cried out,
<q>It is manifest that the Almighty has fought for us, and has
driven the Jews from those towers; since neither the utmost
human force, nor that of all the engines in the world, could
have effected it.</q><note place='foot'>Joseph. 1. iii. c. 46.</note>
</p>

<p>
Besides the visible and sensible connection of sacred and
profane history, there is another more secret and more distinct
relation with respect to the Messiah, for whose coming the
Almighty, whose work was ever present to his sight, prepared
mankind from far, even by the state of ignorance and dissoluteness
in which he suffered them to be immersed during four
thousand years. It was to make mankind sensible of the
necessity of our having a Mediator, that God permitted the
nations to walk after their own ways; while neither the light
of reason, nor the dictates of philosophy, could dispel the
clouds of error, or reform their depraved inclinations.
</p>

<p>
When we take a view of the grandeur of empires, the majesty
of princes, the glorious actions of great men, the order of civil
societies, and the harmony of the different members of which
they are composed, the wisdom of legislators, and the learning
of philosophers, the earth seems to exhibit nothing to the eye
of man but what is great and resplendent; nevertheless, in the
eye of God it was equally barren and uncultivated, as at the
first instant of the creation. <q>The earth was <hi rend='smallcaps'>without form
and void</hi>.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. i. 2.</note> This is
saying but little: it was wholly polluted
and impure, (the reader will observe that I speak here of the
heathens), and appeared to God only as the haunt and retreat
of ungrateful and perfidious men, as it did at the time of the
flood. <q>The earth was corrupt before God, and was filled
with iniquity.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid. vi. 11.</note>
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless the Sovereign Arbiter of the universe, who,
pursuant to the dictates of his wisdom, dispenses both light
and darkness, and knows how to check the impetuous torrent
<pb n='xi'/><anchor id='Pgxi'/>
of human passions, would not permit mankind, though abandoned
to the utmost corruptions, to degenerate into absolute
barbarity, and brutalize themselves, in a manner, by the extinction
of the first principles of the law of nature, as is seen
in several savage nations. Such an obstacle would have too
much retarded the rapid progress, promised by him to the first
preachers of the doctrine of his Son.
</p>

<p>
He darted from far, into the minds of men, the rays of
several great truths, to dispose them for the reception of others
more important. He prepared them for the instructions of
the Gospel, by those of philosophers; and it was with this
view that God permitted the heathen professors to examine, in
their schools, several questions, and establish several principles,
which are nearly allied to religion; and to engage the
attention of mankind, by the brilliancy of their disputations.
It is well known, that the philosophers inculcate, in every part
of their writings, the existence of a God, the necessity of a
Providence that presides over the government of the world, the
immortality of the soul, the ultimate end of man, the reward of
the good and punishment of the wicked, the nature of those
duties which constitute the band of society, the character of
the virtues that are the basis of morality, as prudence, justice,
fortitude, temperance, and other similar truths, which, though
incapable of guiding men to righteousness, were yet of use to
scatter certain clouds, and to dispel certain obscurities.
</p>

<p>
It is by an effect of the same providence, which prepared,
from far, the ways of the gospel, that, when the Messiah
revealed himself in the flesh, God had united together almost
all nations, by the Greek and Latin tongues; and had subjected
to one monarch, from the ocean to the Euphrates, all
the people not united by language, in order to give a more free
course to the preaching of the apostles. The study of profane
history, when entered upon with judgment and maturity, must
lead us to these reflections, and point out to us the manner in
which the Almighty makes the empires of the earth subservient
to the establishment of the kingdom of his Son.
</p>

<p>
It ought likewise to teach us how to appreciate all that
glitters most in the eye of the world, and is most capable of
dazzling it. Valour, fortitude, skill in government, profound
policy, merit in magistracy, capacity for the most abstruse
sciences, beauty of genius, delicacy of taste, and perfection in
all arts: These are the objects which profane history exhibits
to us, which excite our admiration, and often our envy. But
at the same time this very history ought to remind us, that the
Almighty, ever since the creation, has indulged to his enemies
<pb n='xii'/><anchor id='Pgxii'/>
all those shining qualities which the world esteems, and on
which it frequently bestows the highest eulogiums; while, on
the contrary, he often refuses them to his most faithful servants,
whom he endues with talents of an infinitely superior
nature, though men neither know their value, nor are desirous
of them. <q>Happy is that people that is in such a case: Yea,
happy is that people, whose God is the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>Psal.
cxliv. 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
I shall conclude this first part of my preface with a reflection
which results naturally from what has been said. Since it is
certain, that all these great men, who are so much boasted of
in profane history, were so unhappy as not to know the true
God, and to displease him; we should therefore be cautious
and circumspect in the praises which we bestow upon them.
St. Austin, in his <hi rend='italic'>Retractions</hi>, repents his having lavished so
many encomiums on Plato, and the followers of his philosophy;
<q>because these,</q> says he, <q>were impious men, whose doctrine,
in many points, was contrary to that of Jesus Christ.</q><note place='foot'>Laus ipsa,
quâ Platonem vel Platonicos seu Academicos philosophos tantùm
extuli, quantùm impios homines non oportuit, non immeritò mihi displicuit; præsertim
quorum contra errores magnes defendenda est Christiana doctrina.
<hi rend='italic'>Retract.</hi> 1. i. c. 1.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
However, we are not to imagine, that St. Austin supposes it
to be unlawful for us to admire and praise whatever is either
beautiful in the actions, or true in the maxims, of the heathens.
He only advises us to correct whatever is erroneous, and to
approve whatever is conformable to rectitude and justice in
them.<note place='foot'>Id in quoque corrigendum, quod pravum est; quod autem rectum est,
approbandum. <hi rend='italic'>De Bapt. cont. Donat.</hi> 1. vii. c.
16.&mdash;Trans.</note> He applauds the Romans on many occasions, and particularly
in his books <hi rend='italic'>De Civitate Dei</hi>,<note place='foot'>Lib. v. c. 19,
21, &amp;c.</note> which is one of the
last and finest of his works. He there shows, that the Almighty
raised them to be victorious over nations, and sovereigns of a
great part of the earth, because of the gentleness and equity of
their government (alluding to the happy ages of the Republic);
thus bestowing on virtues, that were merely human, rewards of
the same kind, with which that people, blind on this subject,
though so enlightened on others, were so unhappy as to content
themselves. St. Austin, therefore, does not condemn the
encomiums which are bestowed on the heathens, but only the
excess of them.
</p>

<p>
Students ought to take care, and especially we, who by the
duties of our profession are obliged to be perpetually conversant
with heathen authors, not to enter too far into the spirit
of them; not to imbibe, unperceived, their sentiments, by
<pb n='xiii'/><anchor id='Pgxiii'/>
lavishing too great applauses on their heroes; nor to give into
excesses which the heathens indeed did not consider as such,
because they were not acquainted with virtues of a purer kind.
Some persons, whose friendship I esteem as I ought, and for
whose learning and judgment I have the highest regard, have
found this defect in some parts of my work, on the <hi rend='italic'>Method of
Teaching and Studying the Belles Lettres</hi>, &amp;c.; and are of
opinion, that I have gone too great lengths in the encomiums
which I bestow on the illustrious men of paganism. I indeed
own, that the expressions on those occasions are sometimes
too strong and too unguarded: however, I imagined that I had
supplied a proper corrective to this, by the hints which I have
interspersed in those four volumes; and, therefore, that it would
be only losing time to repeat them; not to mention my having
laid down, in different places, the principles which the Fathers
of the Church establish on this head, declaring, with St. Austin,
that without true piety, that is, without a sincere worship of
the true God, there can be no true virtue; and that no virtue
can be such, whose object is worldly glory; a truth, says this
Father, acknowledged universally by those who are inspired
with real and solid piety. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Illud constat inter
omnes veraciter pios, neminem sine verâ pietate, id est, veri Dei vero cultu,
veram posse habere virtutem; nec eam veram esse, quando
gloriæ servit humanæ</foreign>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Civitate Dei</hi>,
1. v. c. 19.</note>
</p>


<p>
When I observed that Perseus had not resolution enough
to kill himself,<note place='foot'>Vol. iv. p. 385.</note>
I do not thereby pretend to justify the practice
of the heathens, who looked upon suicide as lawful; but
simply to relate an incident, and the judgment which Paulus
Æmilius passed on it. Had I barely hinted a word or two
against that custom, it would have obviated all mistake, and
left no room for censure.
</p>

<p>
The ostracism, employed in Athens against persons of the
greatest merit; theft connived at, as it appears, by Lycurgus
in Sparta; an equality of goods established in the same city,
by the authority of the state, and things of a like nature, may
admit of some difficulty. However, I shall pay a more immediate
attention to these particulars,<note place='foot'>This Mr Rollin has done admirably in
the several volumes of his Ancient History.&mdash;Trans.</note> when the course of the
history brings me to them; and shall avail myself with pleasure
of such lights as the learned and unprejudiced may favour me
by communicating.
</p>

<p>
In a work like that I now offer the public, intended more
immediately for the instruction of youth, it were heartily to be
<pb n='xiv'/><anchor id='Pgxiv'/>
wished, that not one single thought or expression might occur
that could contribute to inculcate false or dangerous principles.
When I first set about writing the present history, I proposed
this for my maxim, the importance of which I perfectly conceive,
but am far from imagining that I have always observed
it, though it was my intention to do so; and therefore on this,
as on many other occasions, I shall stand in need of the reader's
indulgence.
</p>

<p>
As I write principally for young persons, and for those who
do not intend to make very deep researches into ancient history,
I shall not burthen this Work with a sort of erudition,
that might have been naturally introduced into it, but does not
suit my purpose. My design is, in giving a continued series
of ancient history, to extract from the Greek and Latin authors
all that I shall judge most useful and entertaining with respect
to the transactions, and most instructive with regard to the
reflections.
</p>

<p>
I should wish to be able to avoid, at the same time, the dry
sterility of epitomes, which convey no distinct idea to the
mind; and the tedious accuracy of long histories, which tire
the reader's patience. I am sensible that it is difficult to steer
exactly between the two extremes; and although, in the two
parts of history of which this first volume consists, I have
retrenched a great part of what we meet with in ancient authors,
they may still be thought too long: but I was afraid of spoiling
the incidents, by being too studious of brevity. However,
the taste of the public shall be my guide, to which I shall
endeavour to conform hereafter.
</p>

<p>
I was so happy as not to displease the public in my first
attempt.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Method of Teaching and Studying the
Belles Lettres</hi>, &amp;c. The English translation (in four volumes) of this
excellent piece of criticism, was first printed for A. Bettesworth and C. Hitch, in
Paternoster-Row.&mdash;Trans.</note> I wish the present Work may be equally successful,
but dare not raise my hopes so high. The subjects I there
treated, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> polite literature, poetry, eloquence, and curious
and detached pieces of history, gave me an opportunity of introducing
into it from ancient and modern authors, whatever is
most beautiful, affecting, delicate, and just, with regard both to
thought and expression. The beauty and justness of the
things themselves which I offered the reader, made him more
indulgent to the manner in which they were presented to him;
and besides, the variety of the subjects supplied the want of
those graces which might have been expected from the style
and composition.
</p>

<pb n='xv'/><anchor id='Pgxv'/>

<p>
But I have not the same advantage in the present work, the
choice of the subjects not being entirely at my discretion. In
a connected history, an author is often obliged to relate a great
many things that are not always very interesting, especially
with regard to the origin and rise of empires; and these parts
are generally overrun with thorns, and offer very few flowers.
However, the sequel will furnish matter of a more pleasing
nature, and events that engage more strongly the reader's
attention; and I shall take care to make use of the valuable
materials which the best authors will supply. In the mean
time, I must entreat the reader to remember that in a wide-extended
and beautiful region, the eye does not everywhere
meet with golden harvests, smiling meads, and fruitful orchards;
but sees, at different intervals, wild and less cultivated tracts of
land. And, to use another comparison, furnished by Pliny,<note place='foot'>Arborum
flos, est pleni veris indicium, et anni renascentis; flos gaudium arborum.
Tunc se novas, aliasque quàm sunt, ostendunt, tunc variis colorum picturis in
certamen usque luxuriant. Sed hoc negatum plerisque. Non enim omnes florent,
et sunt tristes quædam, quæque non sentiant guadia annorum; nec ullo flore exhilarantur,
natalesve pomorum recursus annuos versicolori nuntio promittunt. Plin.
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. Nat.</hi> 1. xvi. c. 25.&mdash;Trans.</note>
some trees in the spring emulously shoot forth a numberless
multitude of blossoms, which by this rich dress (the splendour
and vivacity of whose colours charm the eye) proclaim a
happy abundance in a more advanced season: while other
trees,<note place='foot'>As the fig-trees.&mdash;Trans.</note> of a less gay appearance,
though they bear good fruits, have not however the fragrance and beauty of blossoms, nor
seem to share in the joy of reviving nature. The reader will
easily apply this image to the composition of history.
</p>

<p>
To adorn and enrich my own, I will be so ingenuous as to
confess, that I do not scruple, nor am ashamed, to rifle from
all quarters, and that I often do not cite the authors from
whom I transcribe, because of the liberty I occasionally take
to make some slight alterations. I have made the best use in
my power of the solid reflections that occur in the second and
third parts of the bishop of Meaux's<note place='foot'>Mons.
Bossuet.&mdash;Trans.</note> <hi rend='italic'>Universal History</hi>,
which is one of the most beautiful and most useful books in
our language. I have also received great assistance from the
learned Dean Prideaux's <hi rend='italic'>Connection of the Old and New
Testament</hi>, in which he has traced and cleared up, in an
admirable manner, the particulars relating to ancient history.
I shall take the same liberty with whatever comes in my way,
that may suit my design, and contribute to the perfection of my
Work.
</p>

<pb n='xvi'/><anchor id='Pgxvi'/>

<p>
I am very sensible, that it is not so much for a person's
reputation, thus to make use of other men's labours, and that
it is in a manner renouncing the name and quality of author.
But I am not over fond of that title; and shall be extremely
well pleased, and think myself very happy, if I can but deserve
the name of a good compiler, and supply my readers with a
tolerable history; who will not be over solicitous to inquire
whether it be an original composition of my own, or not, provided
they are but pleased with it.
</p>

<p>
I cannot determine the exact number of volumes which this
Work will make; but am persuaded there will be no less than
ten or twelve.<note place='foot'>Former editions of this Work were printed in ten
volumes.&mdash;Trans.</note> Students, with a very moderate application,
may easily go through this course of history in a year, without
interrupting their other studies. According to my plan, my
Work should be given to the highest form but one. Youths in
this class are capable of pleasure and improvement from this
history; and I would not have them enter upon that of the
Romans till they study rhetoric.
</p>

<p>
It would have been useful, and even necessary, to have given
some idea of the ancient authors from whence I have extracted
the facts which I here relate. But the course itself of the
history will naturally give me an opportunity of mentioning
them.
</p>

<p>
In the mean time, it may not be improper to take notice of
the superstitious credulity with which most of these authors
are reproached, on the subject of auguries, auspices, prodigies,
dreams, and oracles. And indeed, we are shocked to see
writers, so judicious in all other respects, lay it down as a kind
of law, to relate these particulars with a scrupulous accuracy;
and to dwell gravely on a tedious detail of trifling and ridiculous
ceremonies, such as the flight of birds to the right or left
hand, signs discovered in the smoking entrails of beasts, the
greater or less greediness of chickens in pecking corn, and a
thousand similar absurdities.
</p>

<p>
It must be confessed, that a sensible reader cannot, without
astonishment, see persons among the ancients in the highest
repute for wisdom and knowledge; generals who were the least
liable to be influenced by popular opinions, and most sensible
how necessary it is to take advantage of auspicious moments;
the wisest councils of princes perfectly well skilled in the arts
of government; the most august assemblies of grave senators;
in a word, the most powerful and most learned nations in all
ages; to see, I say, all these so unaccountably weak, as to
<pb n='xvii'/><anchor id='Pgxvii'/>
make to depend on these trifling practices and absurd observances,
the decision of the greatest affairs, such as the declaring
of war, the giving battle, or pursuing a victory, deliberations
that were of the utmost importance, and on which the fate and
welfare of kingdoms frequently depended.
</p>

<p>
But, at the same time, we must be so just as to own, that
their manners, customs, and laws, would not permit men, in
these ages, to dispense with the observation of these practices:
that education, hereditary tradition transmitted from immemorial
time, the universal belief and consent of different nations,
the precepts, and even examples of philosophers; that all
these, I say, made the practices in question appear venerable
in their eyes: and that these ceremonies, how absurd soever
they may appear to us, and are really so in themselves, constituted
part of the religion and public worship of the ancients.
</p>

<p>
This religion was false, and this worship mistaken; yet the
principle of it was laudable, and founded in nature; the stream
was corrupted, but the fountain was pure. Man, assisted only
by his own light, sees nothing beyond the present moment.
Futurity is to him an abyss invisible to the most keen, the
most piercing sagacity, and exhibits nothing on which he may
with certainty fix his views, or form his resolutions. He
is equally feeble and impotent with regard to the execution
of his designs. He is sensible, that he is dependent entirely
on a Supreme Power, that disposes all events with absolute
authority, and which, in spite of his utmost efforts, and of the
wisdom of the best concerted schemes, by raising only the
smallest obstacles and slightest disappointments, renders it
impossible for him to execute his measures.
</p>

<p>
This obscurity and weakness oblige him to have recourse to
a superior knowledge and power: he is forced, both by his
immediate wants, and the strong desire he has to succeed in all
his undertakings, to address that Being who he is sensible has
reserved to himself alone the knowledge of futurity, and the
power of disposing it as he sees fitting. He accordingly directs
prayers, makes vows, and offers sacrifices, to prevail, if possible,
with the Deity, to reveal himself, either in dreams, in oracles,
or other signs which may manifest his will; fully convinced
that nothing can happen but by the divine appointment; and
that it is a man's greatest interest to know this supreme will, in
order to conform his actions to it.
</p>

<p>
This religious principle of dependence on, and veneration of,
the Supreme Being, is natural to man: it is imprinted deep in
his heart; he is reminded of it, by the inward sense of his
extreme indigence, and by all the objects which surround him;
<pb n='xviii'/><anchor id='Pgxviii'/>
and it may be affirmed, that this perpetual recourse to the
Deity, is one of the principal foundations of religion and the
strongest band by which man is united to his Creator.
</p>

<p>
Those who were so happy as to know the true God, and
were chosen to be his peculiar people, never failed to address
him in all their wants and doubts, in order to obtain his succour,
and to know his will. He accordingly vouchsafed to
reveal himself to them; to conduct them by apparitions, dreams,
oracles, and prophecies; and to protect them by miracles of
the most astonishing kind.
</p>

<p>
But those who were so blind as to substitute falsehood in
the place of truth, directed themselves, for the like aid, to
fictitious and deceitful deities, who were not able to answer
their expectations, nor recompense the homage that mortals
paid them, any otherwise than by error and illusion, and a
fraudulent imitation of the conduct of the true God.
</p>

<p>
Hence arose the vain observation of dreams, which, from
a superstitious credulity, they mistook for salutary warnings
from Heaven; those obscure and equivocal answers of oracles,
beneath whose veil the spirits of darkness concealed their ignorance;
and, by a studied ambiguity, reserved to themselves
an evasion or subterfuge, whatever might be the event. To
this are owing the prognostics with regard to futurity, which
men fancied they should find in the entrails of beasts, in the
flight and singing of birds, in the aspect of the planets, in fortuitous
accidents, and in the caprice of chance; those dreadful
prodigies that filled a whole nation with terror, and which, it
was believed, nothing could expiate but mournful ceremonies,
and even sometimes the effusion of human blood: in fine,
those black inventions of magic, those delusions, enchantments,
sorceries, invocations of ghosts, and many other kinds of divination.
</p>

<p>
All I have here related was a received usage, observed by
the heathen nations in general; and this usage was founded
on the principles of that religion of which I have given a short
account. We have a signal proof of this in that passage of the
Cyropædia,<note place='foot'>Xenoph. <hi rend='italic'>in Cyrop.</hi>
1. i. p. 25, 27.&mdash;Trans.</note> where Cambyses, the father of Cyrus, gives that
young prince such noble instructions; instructions admirably
well adapted to form the great captain, and great king. He
exhorts him, above all things, to pay the highest reverence to
the gods; and not to undertake any enterprise, whether important
or inconsiderable, without first calling upon and consulting
them; he enjoins him to honour the priests and augurs, as
<pb n='xix'/><anchor id='Pgxix'/>
being their ministers and the interpreters of their will, but yet
not to trust or abandon himself so implicitly and blindly to
them, as not, by his own application, to learn every thing relating
to the science of divination, of auguries and auspices. The
reason which he gives for the subordination and dependence in
which kings ought to live with regard to the gods, and the
benefit derived from consulting them in all things, is this: How
clear-sighted soever mankind may be in the ordinary course of
affairs, their views are always very narrow and bounded with
regard to futurity; whereas the Deity, at a single glance, takes
in all ages and events. <q>As the gods,</q> says Cambyses to his
son, <q>are eternal, they know equally all things, past, present,
and to come. With regard to the mortals who address them,
they give salutary counsels to those whom they are pleased to
favour, that they may not be ignorant of what things they ought,
or ought not, to undertake. If it is observed, that the deities do
not give the like counsels to all men; we are not to wonder at
it, since no necessity obliges them to attend to the welfare of
those persons on whom they do not vouchsafe to confer their
favour.</q>
</p>

<p>
Such was the doctrine of the most learned and most enlightened
nations, with respect to the different kinds of divination;
and it is no wonder that the authors who wrote the history
of those nations, thought it incumbent on them to give an exact
detail of such particulars as constituted part of their religion
and worship, and was frequently in a manner the soul of their
deliberations, and the standard of their conduct. I therefore
was of opinion, for the same reason, that it would not be proper
for me to omit entirely, in the ensuing history, what relates to
this subject, though I have however retrenched a great part
of it.
</p>

<p>
Archbishop Usher is my usual guide in chronology. In the
history of the Carthaginians I commonly set down four æras:
The year from the creation of the world, which, for brevity's
sake, I mark thus, A.M.; those of the foundation of Carthage
and Rome; and lastly, the year before the birth of our Saviour,
which I suppose to be the 4004th year of the world; wherein
I follow Usher and others, though they suppose it to be four
years earlier.
</p>

<p>
We shall now proceed to give the reader the proper preliminary
information concerning this Work, according to the
order in which it is executed.
</p>

<p>
To know in what manner the states and kingdoms were
founded, that have divided the universe; the steps whereby
<pb n='xx'/><anchor id='Pgxx'/>
they rose to that pitch of grandeur related in history; by what
ties families and cities were united, in order to constitute one
body or society, and to live together under the same laws and
a common authority; it will be necessary to trace things back,
in a manner, to the infancy of the world, and to those ages in
which mankind, being dispersed into different regions, (after the
confusion of tongues,) began to people the earth.
</p>

<p>
In these early ages every father was the supreme head of his
family; the arbiter and judge of whatever contests and divisions
might arise within it; the natural legislator over his little society;
the defender and protector of those, who, by their birth, education,
and weakness, were under his protection and safeguard,
and whose interests paternal tenderness rendered equally dear
to him as his own.
</p>

<p>
But although these masters enjoyed an independent authority,
they made a mild and paternal use of it. So far from
being jealous of their power, they neither governed with haughtiness,
nor decided with tyranny. As they were obliged by
necessity to associate their family in their domestic labours,
they also summoned them together, and asked their opinion in
matters of importance. In this manner all affairs were transacted
in concert, and for the common good.
</p>

<p>
The laws which paternal vigilance established in this little
domestic senate, being dictated with no other view than to
promote the general welfare; concerted with such children as
were come to years of maturity, and accepted by the inferiors
with a full and free consent; were religiously kept and
preserved in families as an hereditary polity, to which they
owed their peace and security.
</p>

<p>
But different motives gave rise to different laws. One man,
overjoyed at the birth of a first-born son, resolved to distinguish
him from his future children, by bestowing on him a more considerable
share of his possessions, and giving him a greater
authority in his family. Another, more attentive to the interest
of a beloved wife, or darling daughter whom he wanted to settle
in the world, thought it incumbent on him to secure their
rights and increase their advantages. The solitary and cheerless
state to which a wife would be reduced in case she should
become a widow, affected more intimately another man, and
made him provide beforehand, for the subsistence and comfort
of a woman who formed his felicity. From these different
views, and others of the like nature, arose the different customs
of nations, as well as their rights, which are infinitely various.
</p>

<p>
In proportion as every family increased, by the birth of
<pb n='xxi'/><anchor id='Pgxxi'/>
children, and their marrying into other families, they extended
their little domain, and formed, by insensible degrees, towns
and cities.
</p>

<p>
These societies growing, in process of time, very numerous;
and the families being divided into various branches, each of
which had its head, whose different interests and characters
might interrupt the general tranquillity; it was necessary to
intrust one person with the government of the whole, in order
to unite all these chiefs or heads under a single authority, and
to maintain the public peace by an uniform administration.
The idea which men still retained of the paternal government,
and the happy effects they had experienced from it, prompted
them to choose from among their wisest and most virtuous
men, him in whom they had observed the tenderest and most
fatherly disposition. Neither ambition nor cabal had the least
share in this choice; probity alone, and the reputation of
virtue and equity, decided on these occasions, and gave the preference
to the most worthy.<note place='foot'>Quos ad fastigium nujus majestatis non ambitio
popularis, sed spectata inter bonos moderatio provebebat. Justin, 1. i. c.
1.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
To heighten the lustre of their newly-acquired dignity, and
enable them the better to put the laws in execution, as well as
to devote themselves entirely to the public good; to defend the
state against the invasions of their neighbours, and the factions
of discontented citizens; the title of king was bestowed upon
them, a throne was erected, and a sceptre put into their hands;
homage was paid them, officers were assigned, and guards
appointed for the security of their persons; tributes were
granted; they were invested with full powers to administer
justice, and for this purpose were armed with a sword, in order
to restrain injustice, and punish crimes.
</p>

<p>
At first, every city had its particular king, who being more
solicitous to preserve his dominion than to enlarge it, confined his
ambition within the limits of his native country.<note place='foot'>Fines imperii tueri
magis quàm proferre mos erat. Intra suam cuique patriam
regna finiebantur. Justin, 1. i. c. 1.&mdash;Trans.</note> But the
almost unavoidable feuds which break out between neighbours;
jealousy against a more powerful king; a turbulent and restless
spirit; a martial disposition, or thirst of aggrandizement; or
the display of abilities; gave rise to wars, which frequently
ended in the entire subjection of the vanquished, whose cities
were possessed by the victor, and increased insensibly his dominions.
Thus, a first victory paving the way to a second, and
<pb n='xxii'/><anchor id='Pgxxii'/>
making a prince more powerful and enterprising, several cities
and provinces were united under one monarch, and formed
kingdoms of a greater or less extent, according to the degree
of ardour with which the victor had pushed his conquests.<note place='foot'>Domitis
proximis, cum accessione virium fortior ad alios transiret, et proxima
quæque victoria instrumentum sequentis esset, totius orientis populos subegit.
Justin, 1. i. c. 1.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
But among these princes were found some, whose ambition
being too vast to confine itself within a single kingdom, broke
over all bounds, and spread universally like a torrent, or the
ocean; swallowed up kingdoms and nations; and fancied that
glory consisted in depriving princes of their dominions, who
had not done them the least injury; in carrying fire and sword
into the most remote countries, and in leaving every where
bloody traces of their progress! Such was the origin of those
famous empires which included a great part of the world.
</p>

<p>
Princes made a various use of victory, according to the
diversity of their dispositions or interests. Some, considering
themselves as absolute masters of the conquered, and imagining
they were sufficiently indulged in sparing their lives,
bereaved them, as well as their children, of their possessions,
their country, and their liberty; subjected them to a most
severe captivity; employed them in those arts which are necessary
for the support of life, in the lowest and most servile
offices of the house, in the painful toils of the field; and frequently
forced them, by the most inhuman treatment, to dig in
mines, and ransack the bowels of the earth, merely to satiate
their avarice; and hence mankind were divided into freemen
and slaves, masters and bondmen.
</p>

<p>
Others introduced the custom of transporting whole nations
into new countries, where they settled them, and gave them lands
to cultivate.
</p>

<p>
Other princes again, of more gentle dispositions, contented
themselves with only obliging the vanquished nations to purchase
their liberties, and the enjoyment of their laws and privileges
by annual tributes laid on them for that purpose; and
sometimes they would suffer kings to sit peaceably on their
thrones, upon condition of their paying them some kind of
homage.
</p>

<p>
But such of these monarchs as were the wisest and ablest
politicians, thought it glorious to establish a kind of equality
betwixt the nations newly conquered and their other subjects;
granting the former almost all the rights and privileges which
the others enjoyed: and by this means a great number of
nations, that were spread over different and far distant countries,
constituted, in some measure, but one city, at least but
one people.
</p>

<p>
Thus I have given a general and concise idea of mankind,
<pb n='xxiii'/><anchor id='Pgxxiii'/>
from the earliest monuments which history has preserved on
this subject; the particulars whereof I shall endeavour to
relate, in treating of each empire and nation. I shall not
touch upon the history of the Jews, nor that of the Romans.
</p>

<p>
The history of the Carthaginians, that of the Assyrians, and
the Lydians, which occurs in the second volume, is supported
by the best authorities; but it is highly necessary to review
the geography, the manners, and customs of the different
nations here treated of; and first with regard to the religion,
manners, and institutions of the Persians and Grecians; because
these show their genius and character, which we may
call, in some measure, the soul of history. For to take notice
only of facts and dates, and confine our curiosity and researches
to them, would be imitating the imprudence of a traveller,
who, in visiting many countries, should content himself with
knowing their exact distance from each other, and consider
only the situation of the several places, their buildings, and the
dresses of the people; without giving himself the least trouble
to converse with the inhabitants, in order to inform himself of
their genius, manners, disposition, laws, and government.
Homer, whose design was to give, in the person of Ulysses, a
model of a wise and intelligent traveller, tells us, at the very
opening of his <hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi>, that his hero informed himself very
exactly of the manners and customs of the several people
whose cities he visited; in which he ought to be imitated by
every person who applies himself to the study of history.
</p>

<p>
As Asia will hereafter be the principal scene of the history
we are now entering upon, it may not be improper to give the
reader such a general idea of it, as may at least make him
acquainted with its most considerable provinces and cities.
</p>

<p>
The northern and eastern parts of Asia are less known in
ancient history.
</p>

<p>
To the north are <hi rend='smallcaps'>Asiatic Sarmatia</hi> and
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Asiatic Scythia</hi>, which answer to Tartary.
</p>

<p>
Sarmatia is situated between the river <hi rend='italic'>Tanais</hi>, which separates
Europe and Asia, and the river <hi rend='italic'>Rha</hi>,
or <hi rend='italic'>Volga</hi>. Scythia
is divided into two parts; the one on this, the other on the
other side of mount <hi rend='italic'>Imaus</hi>. The nations of Scythia best
known to us are the <hi rend='italic'>Sacæ</hi> and the <hi rend='italic'>Massagetæ</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The most eastern parts are, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Serica</hi>, Cathay;
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sinarum regio</hi>, China; and <hi rend='smallcaps'>India</hi>.
This last country was better
known anciently than the two former. It was divided into
two parts; the one on this side the <hi rend='italic'>Ganges</hi>, included between
that river and the <hi rend='italic'>Indus</hi>, which now composes the dominions
<pb n='xxiv'/><anchor id='Pgxxiv'/>
of the Great Mogul; the other part was that on the other side
of the Ganges.
</p>

<p>
The remaining part of Asia, of which much greater mention
is made in history, may be divided into five or six parts, taking
it from east to west.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>I. Upper Asia</hi>, which begins at the river Indus. The chief
provinces are <hi rend='smallcaps'>Gedrosia, Carmania, Arachosia, Drangiana,
Bactriana</hi>, the capital of which was <hi rend='italic'>Bactra</hi>;
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sogdiana, Margiana, Hyrcania</hi>, near the Caspian sea;
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Parthia, Media</hi>, its chief city <hi rend='italic'>Ecbatana</hi>;
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Persia</hi>, the cities of <hi rend='italic'>Persepolis</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Elymais</hi>; <hi rend='smallcaps'>Susiana</hi>, the city of
<hi rend='italic'>Susa</hi>; <hi rend='smallcaps'>Assyria</hi>, the city of
<hi rend='italic'>Nineveh</hi>, situated on the river <hi rend='italic'>Tigris</hi>;
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Mesopotamia</hi>, between the <hi rend='italic'>Euphrates</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Tigris</hi>; <hi rend='smallcaps'>Babylonia</hi>, the city of
<hi rend='italic'>Babylon</hi> on the river Euphrates.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>II. Asia between the Pontus Euxinus and the Caspian
Sea.</hi> Therein we may distinguish four provinces.
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Colchis</hi>, the river <hi rend='italic'>Phasis</hi>, and
mount <hi rend='italic'>Caucasus</hi>. 2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Iberia.</hi>
3. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Albania</hi>; which two last-mentioned provinces now
form part of Georgia. 4. The greater <hi rend='smallcaps'>Armenia</hi>. This is
separated from the lesser by the Euphrates; from Mesopotamia
by mount <hi rend='italic'>Taurus</hi>; and from Assyria by mount
<hi rend='italic'>Niphates</hi>. Its cities are <hi rend='italic'>Artaxata</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Tigranocerta</hi>, and the
river <hi rend='italic'>Araxes</hi> runs through it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>III. Asia Minor.</hi> This may be divided into four or five
parts, according to the different situation of its provinces.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Northward</hi>, on the shore of the Pontus Euxinus;
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Pontus</hi>, under three different names. Its cities are,
<hi rend='italic'>Trapezus</hi>, not far from which are the people called
<hi rend='italic'>Chalybes</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>Chaldæi</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>Themiscyra</hi>, a city on the river <hi rend='italic'>Thermodon</hi>,
and famous for having been the abode of the Amazons. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Paphlagonia,
Bithynia</hi>; the cities of which are, <hi rend='italic'>Nicæa</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Prusa</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Nicomedia</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Chalcedon</hi> opposite to Constantinople, and
<hi rend='italic'>Heraclea</hi>.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Westward</hi>, going down by the shores of the Ægean sea;
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Mysia</hi>, of which there are two. The
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Lesser</hi>, in which stood <hi rend='italic'>Cyzicus</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Lampsacus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Parium</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Abydos</hi> opposite to Sestos, from which it is separated only by
the Dardanelles; <hi rend='italic'>Dardanum</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sigæum</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ilion</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>Troy</hi>; and almost on the
opposite side, the little island of <hi rend='italic'>Tenedos</hi>. The rivers are,
the <hi rend='italic'>Æsepus</hi>, the <hi rend='italic'>Granicus</hi>, and the
<hi rend='italic'>Simois</hi>. Mount <hi rend='italic'>Ida</hi>. This region is
sometimes called Phrygia Minor, of which <hi rend='italic'>Troas</hi> is part.
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='smallcaps'>Greater Mysia</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Antandros</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Trajanopolis</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Adramyttium</hi>,
<pb n='xxv'/><anchor id='Pgxxv'/>
<hi rend='italic'>Pergamus</hi>. Opposite to this Mysia is the island of
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Lesbos</hi>; the cities of which are,
<hi rend='italic'>Methymna</hi>, where the celebrated <hi rend='italic'>Arion</hi>
was born; and <hi rend='italic'>Mitylene</hi>, which has given to the
whole island its modern name Metelin.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Æolia.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Elea</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Cumæ</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Phocæa</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ionia.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Smyrna</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Clazomenæ</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Teos</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Lebedus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Colophon</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ephesus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Priene</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Miletus</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Caria.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Laodicea</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Antiochia</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Magnesia</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Alabanda</hi>. The river <hi rend='italic'>Mæander</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Doris.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Halicarnassus</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Cnidos</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Opposite to these four last countries, are the islands <hi rend='smallcaps'>Chios,
Samos, Pathmos, Cos</hi>; and lower, towards the south,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rhodes</hi>.
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>Southward</hi>, along the Mediterranean;
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Lycia</hi>, the cities of which are,
<hi rend='italic'>Telmessus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Patara</hi>. The
river <hi rend='italic'>Xanthus</hi>. Here begins mount <hi rend='italic'>Taurus</hi>,
which runs the whole length of Asia, and assumes different names, according
to the several countries through which it passes.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Pamphylia.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Perga</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Aspendus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sida</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cilicia.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Seleucia</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Corycium</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Tarsus</hi>, on the river
<hi rend='italic'>Cydnus</hi>. Opposite to Cilicia is the island of
<hi rend='italic'>Cyprus</hi>. The cities are, <hi rend='italic'>Salamis</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Amathus</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Paphos</hi>.
</p>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>Along the banks of the Euphrates</hi>, going up northward;
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='smallcaps'>Lesser Armenia</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Comana</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Arabyza</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Melitene</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Satala</hi>. The river <hi rend='italic'>Melas</hi>, which empties
itself into the Euphrates.
</p>

<p>
5. <hi rend='italic'>Inland</hi>:
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cappadocia</hi>; the cities whereof are,
<hi rend='italic'>Neocæsarea</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Comana
Pontica</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sebastia</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sebastopolis</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Diocæsarea</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cæsarea</hi>, otherwise
called <hi rend='italic'>Mazaca</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Tyana</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Lycaonia</hi> and <hi rend='smallcaps'>Isauria</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Iconium</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Isauria</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Pisidia.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Seleucia</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Antiochia</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Pisidia</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Lydia.</hi> Its cities are, <hi rend='italic'>Thyatira</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Sardis</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Philadelphia</hi>.
The rivers are, <hi rend='italic'>Caystrus</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Hermus</hi>,
into which the <hi rend='italic'>Pactolus</hi> empties itself. Mount
<hi rend='italic'>Sipylus</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Tmolus</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Phrygia Major.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Synnada</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Apamia</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>IV. Syria</hi>, now named <hi rend='italic'>Suria</hi>,
called under the Roman emperors the <hi rend='italic'>East</hi>, the chief
provinces of which are,
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Palestine</hi>, by which name is sometimes understood all
Judea. Its cities are, <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Samaria</hi>,
and <hi rend='italic'>Cæsarea Palestina</hi>. The river <hi rend='italic'>Jordan</hi>
waters it. The name of Palestine is also given to the land of Canaan, which extended
along the Mediterranean; the chief cities of which were, <hi rend='italic'>Gaza</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ascalon</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Azotus</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Accaron</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Gath</hi>.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Phœnicia</hi>, whose cities are,
<hi rend='italic'>Ptolemais</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Tyre</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Sidon</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Berytus</hi>. Its mountains,
<hi rend='italic'>Libanus</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Antilibanus</hi>.
</p>

<pb n='xxvi'/><anchor id='Pgxxvi'/>

<p>
3. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Syria</hi>, properly so called, or
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Antiochena</hi>; the cities whereof are,
<hi rend='italic'>Antiochia</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Apamia</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Laodicea</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Seleucia</hi>.
</p>

<p>
4. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Comagena.</hi> The city of <hi rend='italic'>Samosata</hi>.
</p>

<p>
5. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cœlesyria.</hi> The cities are, <hi rend='italic'>Zeugma</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Thapsacus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Palmyra</hi>,
and <hi rend='italic'>Damascus</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>V. Arabia Petræa.</hi> Its cities are, <hi rend='italic'>Petra</hi>,
and <hi rend='italic'>Bostra</hi>. Mount <hi rend='italic'>Casius</hi>.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Deserta. Felix.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Of Religion.</head>

<p>
It is observable, that in all ages and in every country, the
several nations of the world, however various and opposite in
their characters, inclinations and manners, have always united
in one essential point; the inherent opinion of an adoration
due to a Supreme Being, and of external forms calculated to
evince such a belief. Into whatever country we cast our eyes,
we find priests, altars, sacrifices, festivals, religious ceremonies,
temples, or places consecrated to religious worship. Among
every people we discover a reverence and awe of the Divinity;
an homage and honour paid to him; and an open profession
of an entire dependence upon him in all their undertakings, in
all their necessities, in all their adversities and dangers. Incapable
of themselves to penetrate into futurity and to ensure
success, we find them careful to consult the Divinity by oracles,
and by other methods of a like nature; and to merit his
protection by prayers, vows, and offerings. It is by the same
supreme authority they believe the most solemn treaties are
rendered inviolable. It is that which gives sanction to their
oaths; and to it by imprecations is referred the punishment of
such crimes and enormities as escape the knowledge and power
of men. On all their private concerns, voyages, journeys, marriages,
diseases, the Divinity is still invoked. With him their
every repast begins and ends. No war is declared, no battle
fought, no enterprise formed, without his aid being first implored;
to which the glory of the success is constantly ascribed
by public acts of thanksgiving, and by the oblation of the most
precious of the spoils, which they never fail to set apart as
appertaining by right to the Divinity.
</p>

<p>
No variety of opinion is discernible in regard to the foundation
of this belief. If some few persons, depraved by false philosophy,
presume from time to time to rise up against this
doctrine, they are immediately disclaimed by the public voice.
They continue singular and alone, without making parties, or
forming sects: the whole weight of the public authority falls
<pb n='xxvii'/><anchor id='Pgxxvii'/>
upon them; a price is set upon their heads; whilst they are
universally regarded as execrable persons, the bane of civil
society, with whom it is criminal to have any kind of commerce.
</p>

<p>
So general, so uniform, so perpetual a consent of all the
nations of the universe, which neither the prejudice of the
passions, the false reasoning of some philosophers, nor the
authority and example of certain princes, have ever been able
to weaken or vary, can proceed only from a first principle,
which forms a part of the nature of man; from an inward
sentiment implanted in his heart by the Author of his being;
and from an original tradition as ancient as the world itself.
</p>

<p>
Such were the source and origin of the religion of the
ancients; truly worthy of man, had he been capable of persisting
in the purity and simplicity of these first principles:
but the errors of the mind, and the vices of the heart, those sad
effects of the corruption of human nature, have strangely disfigured
their original beauty. There are still some faint rays,
some brilliant sparks of light, which a general depravity has not
been able to extinguish utterly; but they are incapable of
dispelling the profound darkness of the gloom which prevails
almost universally, and presents nothing to view but absurdities,
follies, extravagancies, licentiousness, and disorder; in a
word, a hideous chaos of frantic excesses and enormous vices.
</p>

<p>
Can any thing be more admirable than these principles laid
down by Cicero?<note place='foot'>Sit hoc jam à principio persuasum civibus: dominos
esse omnium rerum ac moderatores deos, eaque quæ geruntur eorum geri judicio ac
numine; eosdemque optimè de genere hominum mereri; et, qualis quisque sit, quid agat,
quid in se admittat, quâ mente, quâ pietate religiones colat, intueri; piorumque et
impiorem habere rationem&mdash;Ad divos adeunto castè. Pietatem adhibento, opes amovento.
Cic. <hi rend='italic'>de leg.</hi> l. ii. n. 15, 19.&mdash;Trans.</note> That we ought
above all things to be convinced that there is a Supreme Being, who presides over all the
events of the world, and disposes every thing as sovereign lord
and arbiter: that it is to him mankind are indebted for all the
good they enjoy: that he penetrates into, and is conscious of,
whatever passes in the most secret recesses of our hearts: that
he treats the just and the impious according to their respective
merits: that the true means of acquiring his favour, and of
being pleasing in his sight, is not by employing of riches and
magnificence in the worship that is paid to him, but by presenting
him with a heart pure and blameless, and by adoring
him with an unfeigned and profound veneration.
</p>

<p>
Sentiments so sublime and religious were the result of the
reflections of some few who employed themselves in the study
of the heart of man, and had recourse to the first principles of
<pb n='xxviii'/><anchor id='Pgxxviii'/>
his institution, of which they still retained some valuable relics.
But the whole system of their religion, the tendency of their
public feasts and ceremonies, the essence of the Pagan theology,
of which the poets were the only teachers and professors,
the very example of the gods, whose violent passions, scandalous
adventures, and abominable crimes, were celebrated in
their hymns or odes, and proposed in some measure to the
imitation, as well as adoration, of the people; these were
certainly very unfit means to enlighten the minds of men, and
to form them to virtue and morality.
</p>

<p>
It is remarkable, that in the greatest solemnities of the Pagan
religion, and in their most sacred and venerable mysteries, far
from perceiving any thing which can recommend virtue, piety,
or the practice of the most essential duties of ordinary life, we
find the authority of laws, the imperious power of custom, the
presence of magistrates, the assembly of all orders of the state,
the example of fathers and mothers, all conspire to train up a
whole nation from their infancy in an impure and sacrilegious
worship, under the name, and in a manner under the sanction,
of religion itself; as we shall soon see in the sequel.
</p>

<p>
After these general reflections upon Paganism, it is time to
proceed to a particular account of the religion of the Greeks.
I shall reduce this subject, though infinite in itself, to four
articles, which are, 1. The feasts. 2. The oracles, auguries,
and divinations. 3. The games and combats. 4. The public
shows and representations of the theatre. In each of these
articles, I shall treat only of what appears most worthy of the
reader's curiosity, and has most relation to this history. I
omit saying any thing of sacrifices, having given a sufficient
idea of them elsewhere.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Manner of Teaching</hi>,
&amp;c. vol. i.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<div>
<head>Of the Feasts.</head>

<p>
An infinite number of feasts were celebrated in the several
cities of Greece, and especially at Athens, of which I shall
describe only three of the most famous, the Panathenea, the
feasts of Bacchus, and those of Eleusis.
</p>

<div>
<head>The Panathenea.</head>

<p>
This feast was celebrated at Athens in honour of Minerva,
the tutelary goddess of that city, to which she gave her
name,<note place='foot'>Ἀθήνη.&mdash;Trans.</note>
as well as to the feast of which we are speaking. Its institution
<pb n='xxix'/><anchor id='Pgxxix'/>
was ancient, and it was called at first the Athenea; but after
Theseus had united the several towns of Attica into one city,
it took the name of Panathenea. These feasts were of two
kinds, the great and the less, which were solemnized with
almost the same ceremonies; the less annually, and the great
upon the expiration of every fourth year.
</p>

<p>
In these feasts were exhibited racing, the gymnastic combats,
and the contentions for the prizes of music and poetry. Ten
commissaries, elected from the ten tribes, presided on this
occasion, to regulate the forms, and distribute the rewards to
the victors. This festival continued several days.
</p>

<p>
In the morning of the first day a race was run on foot, in
which each of the runners carried a lighted torch in his hand,
which they exchanged continually with each other without
interrupting their race. They started from the Ceramicus, one
of the suburbs of Athens, and crossed the whole city. The first
that came to the goal, without having put out his torch, carried
the prize. In the afternoon they ran the same course on
horseback.
</p>

<p>
The gymnastic or athletic combats followed the races. The
place for that exercise was upon the banks of the Ilissus, a
small river, which runs through Athens, and empties itself into
the sea at the Piræus.
</p>

<p>
Pericles first instituted the prize of music. In this dispute
were sung the praises of Harmodius and Aristogiton who, at
the expense of their lives, delivered Athens from the tyranny
of the Pisistratidæ; to which was afterwards added the eulogium
of Thrasybulus, who expelled the thirty tyrants. The
prize was warmly disputed, not only amongst the musicians,
but still more so amongst the poets; and it was highly glorious
to be declared victor in this contest. Æschylus is reported to
have died with grief upon seeing the prize adjudged to Sophocles,
who was much younger than himself.
</p>

<p>
These exercises were followed by a general procession,
wherein was carried, with great pomp and ceremony, a sail,
embroidered with gold, on which were curiously delineated the
warlike actions of Pallas against the Titans and Giants. This
sail was affixed to a vessel which bore the name of the goddess.
The vessel, equipped with sails, and with a thousand oars, was
conducted from the Ceramicus to the temple of Eleusis, not by
horses or beasts of draught, but by machines concealed in the
bottom of it, which put the oars in motion, and made the vessel
glide along.
</p>

<p>
The march was solemn and majestic. At the head of it
were old men, who carried olive-branches in their hands,
<pb n='xxx'/><anchor id='Pgxxx'/>
θαλλοφόροι, and these were chosen for the symmetry of their
shape, and the vigour of their complexion. Athenian matrons,
of great age, also accompanied them in the same equipage.
</p>

<p>
The grown and robust men formed the second class. They
were armed at all points, and had bucklers and lances. After
them came the strangers that inhabited Athens, carrying mattocks,
instruments proper for tillage. Next followed the Athenian
women of the same age, attended by the foreigners of
their own sex, carrying vessels in their hands for the drawing
of water.
</p>

<p>
The third class was composed of the young persons of both
sexes, selected from the best families in the city. The young
men wore vests, with crowns upon their heads, and sang a
peculiar hymn in honour of the goddess. The maids carried
baskets, κανηφόροι, in which were placed the sacred utensils
proper to the ceremony, covered with veils to keep them from
the sight of the spectators. The person, to whose care those
sacred things were intrusted, was bound to observe a strict
continence for several days before he touched them, or distributed
them to the Athenian virgins;<note place='foot'>Οὐχὶ προειρημένον
ἡμερῶν ἀριθμὸν ἁγνεύειν μόνον, ἀλλὰ τὸν βιον ὅλον ἡγνευκέναι.
Demost. <hi rend='italic'>in extrema Aristocratia</hi>.&mdash;Trans.</note>
or rather, as Demosthenes
says, his whole life and conduct ought to have been a
perfect model of virtue and purity. It was a high honour for
a young woman to be chosen for so noble and august an office,
and an insupportable affront to be deemed unworthy of it.
We shall see that Hipparchus offered this indignity to the sister
of Harmodius, which extremely incensed the conspirators
against the Pisistratidæ. These Athenian virgins were followed
by the foreign young women, who carried umbrellas and seats
for them.
</p>

<p>
The children of both sexes closed the pomp of the procession.
</p>

<p>
In this august ceremony, the ῥαψωδοι were appointed to sing
certain verses of Homer; a manifest proof of the estimation in
which the works of that poet were held, even with regard to
religion. Hipparchus, son of Pisistratus, first introduced that
custom.
</p>

<p>
I have observed elsewhere,<note place='foot'>Vol. ii. c. 3. § 2.&mdash;Trans.</note>
that in the gymnastic games of
this feast a herald proclaimed, that the people of Athens had
conferred a crown of gold upon the celebrated physician Hippocrates,
in gratitude for the signal services which he had rendered
the state during the pestilence.
</p>

<p>
In this festival the people of Athens put themselves, and the
whole republic, under the protection of Minerva, the tutelary
<pb n='xxxi'/><anchor id='Pgxxxi'/>
goddess of their city, and implored of her all kind of prosperity.
From the time of the battle of Marathon, in these public acts
of worship, express mention was made of the Platæans, and they
were joined in all things with the people of Athens.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Feasts of Bacchus.</head>

<p>
The worship of Bacchus had been brought out of Egypt to
Athens, where several feasts had been established in honour
of that god; two particularly more remarkable than all the
rest, called the great and the less feasts of Bacchus. The latter
were a kind of preparation for the former, and were celebrated
in the open field about autumn. They were named Lenea,
from a Greek word<note place='foot'>Ληνός.</note> that signifies a wine-press. The great
feasts were commonly called Dionysia, from one of the names
of that god,<note place='foot'>Dionysius.</note> and were solemnized in the spring
within the city.
</p>

<p>
In each of these feasts the public were entertained with games,
shows, and dramatic representations, which were attended with
a vast concourse of people, and exceeding magnificence, as will
be seen hereafter: at the same time the poets disputed the
prize of poetry, submitting to the judgment of arbitrators,
expressly chosen for that purpose, their pieces, whether tragic
or comic, which were then represented before the people.
</p>

<p>
These feasts continued many days. Those who were initiated,
mimicked whatever the poets had thought fit to feign of the god
Bacchus. They covered themselves with the skins of wild
beasts, carried a thyrsus in their hands, a kind of pike with
ivy-leaves twisted round it; had drums, horns, pipes, and other
instruments calculated to make a great noise; and wore upon
their heads wreaths of ivy and vine-branches, and of other
trees sacred to Bacchus. Some represented Silenus, some
Pan, others the Satyrs, all drest in suitable masquerade. Many
of them were mounted on asses; others dragged goats<note place='foot'>Goats were
sacrificed, because they spoiled the vines.&mdash;Trans.</note> along
for sacrifices. Men and women, ridiculously dressed in this
manner, appeared night and day in public; and imitating
drunkenness, and dancing with the most indecent gestures, ran
in throngs about the mountains and forests, screaming and
howling furiously; the women especially seemed more outrageous
than the men; and, quite out of their senses, in their
furious<note place='foot'>From this fury of the Bacchanalians these feasts were
distinguished by the name of Orgia, Ὀργὴ, <hi rend='italic'>ira,
furor</hi>.&mdash;Trans.</note> transports invoked the god, whose feast they celebrated,
<pb n='xxxii'/><anchor id='Pgxxxii'/>
with loud cries; εὐοῖ Βάκχε, or ὦ Ἴακχε, or Ἰόβακχε,
or Ἰὼ Βάκχε.
</p>

<p>
This troop of Bacchanalians was followed by the virgins of
the noblest families in the city, who were called κανηφόροι,
from carrying baskets on their heads, covered with vine leaves
and ivy.
</p>

<p>
To these ceremonies others were added, obscene to the last
excess, and worthy of the god who chose to be honoured in
such a manner. The spectators gave into the prevailing
humour, and were seized with the same frantic spirit. Nothing
was seen but dancing, drunkenness, debauchery, and all that
the most abandoned licentiousness can conceive of gross and
abominable. And this an entire people, reputed the wisest of
all Greece, not only suffered, but admired and practised. I say
an entire people; for Plato, speaking of the Bacchanalia, says
in direct terms, that he had seen the whole city of Athens
drunk at once.<note place='foot'>Πάσαν ἐθεασάμην τὴν πόλιν περὶ
τὰ Διονύσια μεθύουσαν. Lib. i. <hi rend='italic'>de leg.</hi> p.
637.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
Livy informs us,<note place='foot'>Liv. 1. xxxix. n. 8, 18.</note>
that this licentiousness of the Bacchanalia
having secretly crept into Rome, the most horrid disorders
were committed there under cover of the night, and the inviolable
secresy which all persons, who were initiated into these
impure and abominable mysteries, were obliged, under the most
horrid imprecations, to observe. The senate, being apprized of
the affair, put a stop to those sacrilegious feasts by the most
severe penalties; and first banished the practisers of them
from Rome, and afterwards from Italy. These examples inform
us, how far a mistaken sense of religion, that covers the
greatest crimes with the sacred name of the Divinity, is capable
of misleading the mind of man.<note place='foot'>Nihil in speciem fallacius est quàm
prava religio, ubi deorum numen prætenditur
sceleribus. Liv. xxxix. n. 16.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Feast of Eleusis.</head>

<p>
There is nothing in all Pagan antiquity more celebrated
than the feast of Ceres Eleusina. The ceremonies of this
festival were called, by way of eminence, <q>the mysteries,</q> from
being, according to Pausanias, as much above all others, as the
gods are above men. Their origin and institution are attributed
to Ceres herself, who, in the reign of Erechtheus, coming
to Eleusis, a small town of Attica, in search of her daughter
Proserpine, whom Pluto had carried away, and finding the
<pb n='xxxiii'/><anchor id='Pgxxxiii'/>
country afflicted with a famine, invented corn as a remedy for
that evil, with which she rewarded the inhabitants. She
not only taught them the use of corn, but instructed them in
the principles of probity, charity, civility, and humanity;<note place='foot'><p>Multa
eximia divinaque videntur Athenæ tuæ peperisse, atque in vitam hominum
attulisse; tum nihil melius illis mysteriis, quibus ex agresti immanique vitâ, exculti
ad humanitatem et mitigati sumus, initiaque ut appellautur, ita re vera principia vitæ
cognovimus. Cic. 1. ii. <hi rend='italic'>de leg.</hi> n. 36.
</p>
<p>
Teque Ceres, et Libera, quarum sacra, sicut opiniones hominum ac religiones ferunt,
longè maximis atque occultissimis ceremoniis continentur: à quibus initia vitæ atque
victùs, legum, morum, mansuetudinis, humanitatis exempla hominibus et civitatibus
data ac dispertita esse dicuntur. Cic. <hi rend='italic'>in Verr. de supplic.</hi>
n. 186.&mdash;Trans.</p></note> from
whence her mysteries were called Θεσμοφόρια, and <hi rend='italic'>Initia</hi>. To
these first happy lessons fabulous antiquity ascribed the courtesy,
politeness, and urbanity, so remarkable amongst the
Athenians.
</p>

<p>
These mysteries were divided into the less and the greater;
of which the former served as a preparation for the latter. The
less were solemnized in the month Anthesterion, which answers
to our November; the great in the month Boëdromion, which
corresponds to August. Only Athenians were admitted to
these mysteries; but of them, each sex, age, and condition,
had a right to be received. All strangers were absolutely
excluded, so that Hercules, Castor, and Pollux, were obliged
to be adopted as Athenians in order to their admission; which,
however, extended only to the lesser mysteries. I shall consider
principally the great, which were celebrated at Eleusis.
</p>

<p>
Those who demanded to be initiated into them, were obliged,
before their reception, to purify themselves in the lesser mysteries,
by bathing in the river Ilissus, by saying certain prayers,
offering sacrifices, and, above all, by living in strict continence
during a certain interval of time prescribed them. That time
was employed in instructing them in the principles and elements
of the sacred doctrine of the great mysteries.
</p>

<p>
When the time for their initiation arrived, they were brought
into the temple; and to inspire the greater reverence and
terror, the ceremony was performed in the night. Wonderful
things took place upon this occasion. Visions were seen, and
voices heard of an extraordinary kind. A sudden splendour
dispelled the darkness of the place, and, disappearing immediately,
added new horrors to the gloom. Apparitions, claps
of thunder, earthquakes, heightened the terror and amazement;
whilst the person to be admitted, overwhelmed with
dread, and sweating through fear, heard, trembling, the mysterious
volumes read to him, if in such a condition he was capable
of hearing at all. These nocturnal rites gave birth to many
<pb n='xxxiv'/><anchor id='Pgxxxiv'/>
disorders, which the severe law of silence, imposed on the persons
initiated, prevented from coming to light, as St. Gregory
Nazianzen observes.<note place='foot'>Οἴδεν Ἐλευσὶν ταῦτα, καὶ οἱ
τῶν σιωπωένων καὶ σιωπῆς; ὄντων ἀξιον ἐτόπται. <hi rend='italic'>Orat
de sacr. lumin.</hi>&mdash;Trans.</note> What cannot superstition effect upon
the mind of man, when once his imagination is heated? The
president in this ceremony was called Hierophantes. He wore
a peculiar habit, and was not permitted to marry. The first
who served in this function, and whom Ceres herself instructed,
was Eumolpus; from whom his successors were called Eumolpidæ.
He had three colleagues; one who carried a torch;<note place='foot'>Δαδοῦχος.</note>
another a herald,<note place='foot'>Κῆρυξ.</note> whose office was to pronounce certain
mysterious words; and a third to attend at the altar.
</p>

<p>
Besides these officers, one of the principal magistrates of the
city was appointed to take care that all the ceremonies of this
feast were exactly observed. He was called the king,<note place='foot'>Βασιλεὺς</note>
and was one of the nine Archons. His business was to offer
prayers and sacrifices. The people gave him four
assistants,<note place='foot'>Ἐπιμελήται</note>
one chosen from the family of the Eumolpidæ, a second from
that of the Ceryces, and the two last from two other families.
He had besides ten other ministers to assist him in the discharge
of his duty, and particularly in offering sacrifices, from
whence they derived their name.<note place='foot'>Ἱεροποιοὶ.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Athenians initiated their children of both sexes very
early into these mysteries, and would have thought it criminal
to have let them die without such an advantage. It was their
general opinion, that this ceremony was an engagement to lead
a more virtuous and regular life; that it recommended them to
the peculiar protection of the goddesses (Ceres and Proserpine,)
to whose service they devoted themselves; and procured to
them a more perfect and certain happiness in the other world:
whilst, on the contrary, such as had not been initiated, besides
the evils they had to apprehend in this life, were doomed, after
their descent to the shades below, to wallow eternally in dirt,
filth, and excrement. Diogenes the Cynic believed nothing
of the matter,<note place='foot'>Diogen. Laërt. l. vi. p. 389.</note>
and when his friends endeavoured to persuade
him to avoid such a misfortune, by being initiated before his
death&mdash;<q>What,</q> said he, <q>shall Agesilaus and Epaminondas
lie amongst mud and dung, whilst the vilest Athenians, because
they have been initiated, possess the most distinguished places
in the regions of the blessed?</q> Socrates was not more credulous;
he would not be initiated into these mysteries, which was
perhaps one reason that rendered his religion suspected.
</p>

<pb n='xxxv'/><anchor id='Pgxxxv'/>

<p>
Without this qualification none were admitted to enter the
temple of Ceres;<note place='foot'>Liv. l. xxxi. n. 14.</note>
and Livy informs us of two Acarnanians, who,
having followed the crowd into it upon one of the feast-days,
although out of mistake and with no ill design, were both put
to death without mercy. It was also a capital crime to divulge
the secrets and mysteries of this feast. Upon this account
Diagoras the Melian was proscribed, and had a reward set upon
his head. It very nearly cost the poet Æschylus his life, for
speaking too freely of it in some of his tragedies. The disgrace
of Alcibiades proceeded from the same cause. Whoever
had violated this secresy, was avoided as a wretch accursed
and excommunicated.<note place='foot'><p>Est et fideli tuta silentio<lb/>
Merces. Vetabo, qui Cereris sacrum<lb/>
Vulgârit arcana, sub iisdem<lb/>
Sit trabibus, fragilemque mecum<lb/>
Solvat phaselum.
</p>
<p>
Hor. <hi rend='italic'>Od.</hi> 2. l. iii.
</p>
<p>
Safe is the silent tongue, which none can blame<lb/>
The faithful secret merit fame;<lb/>
Beneath one roof ne'er let him rest with me,<lb/>
Who <q>Ceres' mysteries</q> reveals;<lb/>
In one frail bark ne'er let us put to sea,<lb/>
Nor tempt the jarring winds with spreading sails.
</p>
<p>&mdash;Trans.</p></note> Pausanias, in several passages,
wherein he mentions the temple of Eleusis, and the ceremonies
practised there, stops short, and declares he cannot
proceed, because he had been forbidden by a dream or
vision.<note place='foot'>Lib. i. p. 26, 71.</note>
</p>

<p>
This feast, the most celebrated of profane antiquity, was of
nine days' continuance. It began the fifteenth of the month
Boëdromion. After some previous ceremonies and sacrifices
on the first three days, upon the fourth in the evening began
the procession of <q>the Basket;</q> which was laid upon an open
chariot slowly drawn by oxen,<note place='foot'><p>Tardaque
Eleusinæ matris volventia plaustra.
</p>
<p>
Virg. <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> l. i. ver. 163.
</p>
<p>
The Eleusinian mother's mystic car
Slow rolling&mdash;&mdash;
</p>
<p>
&mdash;Trans.</p></note> and followed by a long train of
the Athenian women. They all carried mysterious baskets in
their hands, filled with several things, which they took great
care to conceal, and covered with a veil of purple. This ceremony
represented the basket into which Proserpine put the
flowers she was gathering when Pluto seized and carried her off.
</p>

<p>
The fifth day was called the day of <q>the Torches:</q> because
at night the men and women ran about with them in imitation
of Ceres, who having lighted a torch at the fire at mount
Ætna, wandered about from place to place in search of her
daughter.
</p>

<pb n='xxxvi'/><anchor id='Pgxxxvi'/>

<p>
The sixth was the most famous day of all. It was called
Iacchus, which is the same as Bacchus, the son of Jupiter and
Ceres, whose statue was then brought out with great ceremony,
crowned with myrtle, and holding a torch in its hand. The
procession began at the Ceramicus, and passing through the
principal places of the city, continued to Eleusis. The way
leading to it was called <q>the sacred way,</q> and lay across a
bridge over the river Cephisus. This procession was very
numerous, and generally consisted of thirty thousand
persons.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. viii. c. 65.</note>
The temple of Eleusis, where it ended, was large enough to
contain the whole of this multitude; and Strabo says, its extent
was equal to that of the theatres, which every body knows
were capable of holding a much greater number of
people.<note place='foot'>Lib. ix. p. 305.</note>
The whole way reechoed with the sound of trumpets, clarions,
and other musical instruments. Hymns were sung in honour
of the goddesses, accompanied with dancing, and other extraordinary
marks of rejoicing. The route before mentioned, through
the sacred way, and over the Cephisus, was the usual one:
but after the Lacedæmonians, in the Peloponnesian war, had
fortified Decelia, the Athenians were obliged to make their
procession by sea, till Alcibiades reestablished the ancient
custom.
</p>

<p>
The seventh day was solemnized by games, and the gymnastic
combats, in which the victor was rewarded with a
measure of barley; without doubt because it was at Eleusis
the goddess first taught the method of raising that grain, and
the use of it. The two following days were employed in some
particular ceremonies, neither important nor remarkable.
</p>

<p>
During this festival it was prohibited, under very great penalties,
to arrest any person whatsoever, in order to their being
imprisoned, or to present any bill of complaint to the judges.
It was regularly celebrated every fifth year, that is, after a
revolution of four years: and history does not mention that it
was ever interrupted, except upon the taking of Thebes by
Alexander the Great.<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>in
vit. Alex.</hi> p. 671.</note> The Athenians, who were then upon
the point of celebrating the great mysteries, were so much
affected with the ruin of that city, that they could not resolve,
in so general an affliction, to solemnize a festival which breathed
nothing but merriment and rejoicing. It was continued
down to the time of the Christian emperors.<note place='foot'>Zosim.
<hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi> l. iv.</note> Valentinian
would have abolished it, if Prætextatus, the proconsul of Greece,
had not represented, in the most lively and affecting terms,
the universal sorrow which the abrogation of that feast would
<pb n='xxxvii'/><anchor id='Pgxxxvii'/>
occasion among the people; upon which it was suffered to
subsist. It is supposed to have been finally suppressed by
Theodosius the Great; as were all the rest of the Pagan solemnities.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<head>Of Auguries, Oracles, &amp;c.</head>

<p>
Nothing is more frequently mentioned in ancient history,
than oracles, auguries, and divinations. No war was made, or
colony settled; nothing of consequence was undertaken, either
public or private, without having first consulted the gods.
This was a custom universally established amongst the Egyptian,
Assyrian, Grecian, and Roman nations; which is no
doubt a proof, as has been already observed, that it was derived
from ancient tradition, and that it had its origin in the religion
and worship of the true God. It is not indeed to be questioned,
but that God, before the deluge, did manifest his will
to mankind in different methods, as he has since done to his
people, sometimes in his own person and <foreign rend='italic'>vivá voce</foreign>,
sometimes by the ministry of angels or of prophets inspired by himself,
and at other times by apparitions or in dreams. When the
descendants of Noah dispersed themselves into different
regions, they carried this tradition along with them, which was
every where retained, though altered and corrupted by the
darkness and ignorance of idolatry. None of the ancients
have insisted more upon the necessity of consulting the gods
on all occasions by auguries and oracles than Xenophon; and
he founds that necessity, as I have more than once observed
elsewhere, upon a principle deduced from the most refined
reason and discernment. He represents, in several places, that
man of himself is very frequently ignorant of what is advantageous
or pernicious to him; that, far from being capable of
penetrating the future, the present itself escapes him; so
narrow and short-sighted is he in all his views, that the
slightest obstacles can frustrate his greatest designs; that the
Divinity alone, to whom all ages are present, can impart a
certain knowledge of the future to him: that no other being
has power to facilitate the success of his enterprises; and that
it is reasonable to believe he will enlighten and protect those,
who adore him with the purest affection, who invoke him at
all times with greatest constancy and fidelity, and consult him
with most sincerity and integrity.
</p>

<div>
<head>Of Auguries.</head>

<p>
What a reproach is it to human reason, that so luminous a
<pb n='xxxviii'/><anchor id='Pgxxxviii'/>
principle should have given birth to the absurd reasonings, and
wretched notions, in favour of the science of augurs and soothsayers,
and been the occasion of espousing, with blind devotion,
the most ridiculous puerilities: should have made the
most important affairs of state depend upon a bird's happening
to sing upon the right or left hand; upon the greediness of
chickens in pecking their grain; the inspection of the entrails
of beasts; the liver's being entire and in good condition, which,
according to them, did sometimes entirely disappear, without
leaving any trace or mark of its having ever subsisted! To
these superstitious observances may be added, accidental rencounters,
words spoken by chance, and afterwards turned into
good or bad presages; forebodings, prodigies, monsters, eclipses,
comets; every extraordinary phenomenon, every unforeseen
accident, with an infinity of chimeras of the like nature.
</p>

<p>
Whence could it happen, that so many great men, illustrious
generals, able politicians, and even learned philosophers, have
actually given into such absurd imaginations? Plutarch, in
particular, so estimable in other respects, is to be pitied for his
servile observance of the senseless customs of the Pagan idolatry,
and his ridiculous credulity in dreams, signs, and prodigies.
He tells us in his works, that he abstained a great
while from eating eggs, upon account of a dream, with which
he has not thought fit to make us further
acquainted.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Sympos.</hi> l.
ii. quæst. 3. p. 635.</note>
</p>

<p>
The wisest of the Pagans knew well how to appreciate the
art of divination, and often spoke of it to each other, and even
in public, with the utmost contempt, and in a manner best
adapted to expose its absurdity. The grave censor Cato was
of opinion, that one soothsayer could not look at another without
laughing. Hannibal was amazed at the simplicity of
Prusias, whom he had advised to give battle, upon his being diverted
from it by the inspection of the entrails of a victim.
<q>What,</q> said he, <q>have you more confidence in the liver of a
beast, than in so old and experienced a captain as I am?</q>
Marcellus, who had been five times consul, and was augur,
said, that he had discovered a method of not being put to a
stand by the sinister flight of birds, which was, to keep himself
close shut up in his litter.
</p>

<p>
Cicero explains himself upon the subject of auguries without
ambiguity or reserve. Nobody was more capable of speaking
pertinently upon it than himself, (as M. Morin observes in his
dissertation upon the same subject.) As he was adopted into the
college of augurs, he had made himself acquainted with their
<pb n='xxxix'/><anchor id='Pgxxxix'/>
most abstruse secrets, and had all possible opportunity of
informing himself fully in their science. That he did so, sufficiently
appears from the two books he has left us upon divination,
in which, it may be said, he has exhausted the subject.
In the second, wherein he refutes his brother Quintus, who
had espoused the cause of the augurs, he combats and defeats
his false reasonings with a force, and at the same time with so
refined and delicate a raillery, as leaves us nothing to wish;
and he demonstrates by proofs, each more convincing than the
other, the falsity, contrariety, and impossibility of that art.
But what is very surprising, in the midst of all his arguments,
he takes occasion to blame the generals and magistrates, who
on important conjunctures had contemned the prognostics; and
maintains, that the use of them, as great an abuse as it was in
his own opinion, ought nevertheless to be respected, out of
regard to religion, and the prejudices of the people.<note place='foot'>Errabat multis
in rebus antiquitas: quam vel usu jam, vel doctrinâ, vel vetustate
immutatam videmus. Retinetur autem et ad opinionem vulgi, et ad magnas utilitates
reip. mos, religio, disciplina, jus augurum, collegii auctoritas. Nec verò non
omni supplicio digni P. Claudius, L. Junius consules, qui contra auspicia navigârunt.
Parendum enim fuit religioni, nec patrius mos tam contumaciter repudiandus
<hi rend='italic'>Divin.</hi> l. ii. n. 70, 71.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
All that I have hitherto said tends to prove, that Paganism
was divided into two sects, almost equally enemies of religion;
the one by their superstitious and blind regard for auguries, the
other by their irreligious contempt and derision of them.
</p>

<p>
The principle of the first, founded on one side upon the
ignorance and weakness of man in the affairs of life, and on the
other upon the prescience of the Divinity and his almighty
providence, was true; but the consequence deduced from it in
favour of auguries, false and absurd. They ought to have
proved that it was certain, that the Divinity himself had established
these external signs to denote his intentions, and that
he had obliged himself to a punctual conformity to them upon
all occasions: but they had nothing of this in their system.
These auguries and divinations therefore were the effect and
invention of the ignorance, rashness, curiosity, and blind passions
of man, who presumed to interrogate God, and to oblige
him to give answers upon every idle imagination and unjust
enterprise.
</p>

<p>
The others, who gave no real credit to any thing enjoined by
the science of augury, did not fail, however, to observe its
trivial ceremonies through policy, in order the better to subject
the minds of the people to themselves, and to reconcile them
to their own purposes, by the assistance of superstition: but by
<pb n='xl'/><anchor id='Pgxl'/>
their contempt for auguries, and their inward conviction of
their falsity, they were led into a disbelief of the Divine Providence,
and to despise religion itself; conceiving it inseparable
from the numerous absurdities of this kind, which rendered it
ridiculous, and consequently unworthy a man of sense.
</p>

<p>
Both the one and the other behaved in this manner, because,
having mistaken the Creator, and abused the light of nature,
which might have taught them to know and to adore him, they
were deservedly abandoned to their own darkness, and to a
reprobate mind; and, if we had not been enlightened by the
true religion, we, even at this day, should give ourselves up to
the same superstitions.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Of Oracles</head>

<p>
No country was ever richer in, or more productive of oracles,
than Greece. I shall confine myself to those which were
the most noted.
</p>

<p>
The oracle of Dodona, a city of the Molossians, in Epirus,
was much celebrated; where Jupiter gave answers either by
vocal oaks,<note place='foot'>Certain instruments were fastened to the tops of oaks,
which, being shaken by the wind, or by some other means, gave a confused sound. Servius
observes, that the same word, in the Thessalian language, signifies
<hi rend='italic'>dove</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>prophetess</hi>, which had
given room for the fabulous tradition of doves that spoke. It was easy to make
those brazen basins sound by some secret means, and to give what signification they
pleased to a confused and inarticulate note.&mdash;Trans.</note>
or doves, which had also their language, or by
resounding basins of brass, or by the mouths of priests and
priestesses.
</p>

<p>
The oracle of Trophonius in Bœotia, though he was
nothing more than a hero, was in great reputation.<note place='foot'>Pausan.
l. ix. p. 602, 604.</note> After
many preliminary ceremonies, as washing in the river, offering
sacrifices, drinking a water called Lethe, from its quality of
making people forget every thing, the votaries went down into
his cave, by small ladders, through a very narrow passage. At
the bottom was another little cavern, the entrance of which
was also exceeding small. There they lay down upon the
ground, with a certain composition of honey in each hand,
which they were indispensably obliged to carry with them.
Their feet were placed within the opening of the little cave;
which was no sooner done, than they perceived themselves
borne into it with great force and velocity. Futurity was there
revealed to them; but not to all in the same manner. Some
saw, others heard, wonders. From thence they returned quite
stupified, and out of their senses, and were placed in the chair
<pb n='xli'/><anchor id='Pgxli'/>
of Mnemosyne, the goddess of memory; not without great need
of her assistance to recover their remembrance, after their great
fatigue, of what they had seen and heard; admitting they had
seen or heard any thing at all. Pausanias, who had consulted
that oracle himself, and gone through all these ceremonies,
has left a most ample description of it; to which Plutarch
adds some particular circumstances,<note place='foot'>Plut.
<hi rend='italic'>de gen. Socr.</hi> p. 590.</note> which I
omit, to avoid a tedious prolixity.
</p>

<p>
The temple and oracle of the Branchidæ, in the neighbourhood
of Miletus, so called from Branchus, the son of Apollo,
was very ancient, and in great esteem with all the Ionians and
Dorians of Asia.<note place='foot'>Herod, l. i. c. 157. Strab.
l. xiv p. 634.</note> Xerxes, in his return from Greece, burnt
this temple, after the priests had delivered its treasures to him.
That prince, in return, granted them an establishment in the
remotest parts of Asia, to secure them against the vengeance
of the Greeks. After the war was over, the Milesians reestablished
that temple with a magnificence which, according to
Strabo, surpassed that of all the other temples of Greece.
When Alexander the Great had overthrown Darius, he utterly
destroyed the city where the priests Branchidæ had settled, of
which their descendants were at that time in actual possession,
punishing in the children the sacrilegious perfidy of their
fathers.
</p>

<p>
Tacitus relates something very singular, though not very
probable, of the oracle of Claros, a town of Ionia, in Asia
Minor, near Colophon.<note place='foot'>Tacit. <hi rend='italic'>Annal.</hi> l. ii. c.
54.</note> <q>Germanicus,</q> says he, <q>went to consult
Apollo at Claros. It is not a woman that gives the answers
there, as at Delphi, but a man, chosen out of certain families,
and almost always of Miletus. It is sufficient to let him know
the number and names of those who come to consult him.
After which he retires into a cave, and having drunk of the
waters of a spring within it, he delivers answers in verse upon
what the persons have in their thoughts, though he is often
ignorant, and knows nothing of composing in measure. It is
said, that he foretold to Germanicus his sudden death, but in
dark and ambiguous terms, according to the custom of oracles.</q>
</p>

<p>
I omit a great number of other oracles, to proceed to the
most famous of them all. It is very obvious that I mean the
oracle of Apollo at Delphi. He was worshipped there under
the name of the Pythian, a title derived from the serpent
Python, which he had killed, or from a Greek word, that signifies
to inquire, πυθέσθαι, because people came thither to consult
<pb n='xlii'/><anchor id='Pgxlii'/>
him. From thence the Delphic priestess was called Pythia,
and the games there celebrated, the Pythian games.
</p>

<p>
Delphi was an ancient city of Phocis in Achaia. It stood
upon the declivity, and about the middle, of the mountain
Parnassus, built upon a small extent of even ground, and surrounded
with precipices, that fortified it without the help
of art.
</p>

<p>
Diodorus says,<note place='foot'>Lib. xiv. p. 427,
428.</note> that there was a cavity upon Parnassus,
from whence an exhalation rose, which made the goats dance
and skip about, and intoxicated the brain. A shepherd having
approached it, out of a desire to know the causes of so extraordinary
an effect, was immediately seized with violent agitations
of body, and pronounced words, which, without doubt, he did
not understand himself; but which, however, foretold futurity.
Others made the same experiment, and it was soon rumoured
throughout the neighbouring countries. The cavity was no
longer approached without reverence. The exhalation was
concluded to have something divine in it. A priestess was
appointed for the reception of its effects, and a tripod placed
upon the vent, called by the Latins Cortina, perhaps from the
skin<note place='foot'>Corium.</note> that covered it. From thence she gave her oracles.
The city of Delphi rose insensibly round about this cave; and
a temple was erected, which, at length, became very magnificent.
The reputation of this oracle almost effaced, or at least
very much exceeded, that of all others.
</p>

<p>
At first a single Pythia sufficed to answer those who came
to consult the oracle, as they did not yet amount to any great
number: but in process of time, when it grew into universal
repute, a second was appointed to mount the tripod alternately
with the first, and a third chosen to succeed in case of death,
or disease. There were other assistants besides these to attend
the Pythia in the sanctuary, of whom the most considerable
were called prophets;<note place='foot'>Προφήται.</note>
it was their business to take care of
the sacrifices, and to inspect them. To these the demands of
the inquirers were delivered by word of mouth, or in writing;
and they returned the answers, as we shall see in the sequel.
</p>

<p>
We must not confound the Pythia with the Sibyl of Delphi.
The ancients represent the latter as a woman that roved from
country to country, venting her predictions. She was at the
same time the Sibyl of Delphi, Erythræ, Babylon, Cumæ, and
many other places, from her having resided in them all.
</p>

<p>
The Pythia could not prophesy till she was intoxicated by
the exhalation from the sanctuary of Apollo. This miraculous
<pb n='xliii'/><anchor id='Pgxliii'/>
vapour had not that effect at all times and upon all occasions.
The god was not always in the inspiring humour. At first he
imparted himself only once a year, but at length he was prevailed
upon to visit the Pythia every month. All days were
not proper, and upon some it was not permitted to consult the
oracle. These unfortunate days occasioned an oracle's being
given to Alexander the Great worthy of remark. He went to
Delphi to consult the god, at a time when the priestess pretended
it was forbidden to ask him any questions, and would
not enter the temple. Alexander, who was always warm and
tenacious, took hold of her by the arm to force her into it,
when she cried out, <q>Ah, my son, you are not to be resisted!</q>
or, <q>My son, you are invincible!</q><note place='foot'>Ἀνίκητος εἶ,
ὦ παῖ.&mdash;Trans.</note> Upon which words he
declared he would have no other oracle, and was contented
with that he had received.
</p>

<p>
The Pythia, before she ascended the tripod, was a long time
preparing for it by sacrifices, purifications, a fast of three days,
and many other ceremonies. The god denoted his approach
by the moving of a laurel, that stood before the gate of the
temple, which shook also to its very foundations.
</p>

<p>
As soon as the divine vapour,<note place='foot'><p>&mdash;&mdash;Cui talia fanti<lb/>
Ante fores, subitò non vultus, non color unus,<lb/>
Non comptæ mansere comæ: sed pectus anhelum,<lb/>
Et rabie fera corda tument; majorque videri,<lb/>
Nec mortale sonans: afflata est numine quando<lb/>
Jam propiore dei.
</p>
<p>
Virg. <hi rend='italic'>Æn.</hi> l. vi. v.
46-51.&mdash;Trans.</p></note> like a penetrating fire, had
diffused itself through the entrails of the priestess, her hair
stood upright upon her head, her looks grew wild, she foamed
at the mouth, a sudden and violent trembling seized her whole
body, with all the symptoms of distraction and frenzy.<note place='foot'>Among the
various marks which God has given us in the Scriptures to distinguish
his oracles from those of the devil, the fury or madness, attributed by Virgil to
the Pythia, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>et rabie fera corda tument</foreign>,
is one. It is I, saith God, that show the falsehood
of the diviners' predictions, and give to such as divine, the motions of fury and
madness; or according to Isa. xliv. 25, <q>That frustrateth the tokens of the liar,
and maketh diviners mad.</q> Instead of which, the prophets of the true God constantly
gave the divine answers in an equal and calm tone of voice, and with a
noble tranquillity of behaviour. Another distinguishing mark is, that the dæmons
gave their oracles in secret places, by-ways, and in the obscurity of caves; whereas
God gave his in open day, and before all the world. <q>I have not spoken in secret, in
a dark place of the earth,</q> Isa. xlv. 19. <q>I have not spoken in secret from the
beginning,</q> Isa. xlviii. 16. So that God did not permit the devil to imitate his
oracles, without imposing such conditions upon him, as might distinguish between
the true and false inspiration.&mdash;Trans.</note> She
uttered, at intervals, some words almost inarticulate, which the
prophets carefully collected, and arranged with a certain degree
<pb n='xliv'/><anchor id='Pgxliv'/>
of order and connection. After she had been a certain time
upon the tripod, she was reconducted to her cell, where she
generally continued many days to recover from her fatigue;
and, as Lucan says,<note place='foot'>Lib. v.</note>
a sudden death was often either the
reward or punishment of her enthusiasm:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Numinis aut pœna est mors immatura recepti,</l>
<l>Aut pretium.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The prophets had poets under them, who made the oracles
into verses, which were often bad enough, and gave occasion
to remark that, it was very surprising that Apollo, who presided
over the choir of the muses, should inspire his priestess
no better. But Plutarch informs us, that it was not the god
who composed the verses of the oracle. He inflamed the
Pythia's imagination, and kindled in her soul that living light,
which unveiled all futurity to her. The words she uttered in
the heat of her enthusiasm, having neither method nor connection,
and coming only by starts, if that expression may be
used, from the bottom of her stomach, or rather<note place='foot'>Ἐγγαστρίμυθος.</note>
from her belly, were collected with care by the prophets, who gave them
afterwards to the poets to be turned into verse. These Apollo
left to their own genius and natural talents; as we may suppose
he did the Pythia when she herself composed verses,
which, though not often, happened sometimes. The substance
of the oracle was inspired by Apollo, the manner of expressing
it was the priestess's own: the oracles were however often
given in prose.
</p>

<p>
The general characteristics of oracles were ambiguity,<note place='foot'>Quòd si aliquis
dixerit multa ab idolis esse prædicta; hoc sciendum, quòd
semper mendacium junxerint veritati, et sic sententias temperârint, ut, seu boni seu
mali quid accidisset, utrumque possit intelligi. Hieronym. in cap. xlii. Isaiæ. He
cites the two examples of Crœsus and Pyrrhus.&mdash;Trans.</note>
obscurity, and convertibility, (if I may use that expression,)
so that one answer would agree with several various, and sometimes
directly opposite, events. By the help of this artifice,
the dæmons, who of themselves are not capable of knowing
futurity, concealed their ignorance, and amused the credulity
of the Pagan world. When Crœsus was upon the point of
invading the Medes, he consulted the oracle of Delphi upon
the success of that war, and was answered, that by passing the
river Halys, he would ruin a great empire. What empire, his
own, or that of his enemies? He was to guess that; but
whatever the event might be, the oracle could not fail of being
<pb n='xlv'/><anchor id='Pgxlv'/>
in the right. As much may be said upon the same god's
answer to Pyrrhus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Aio te, Æacida, Romanos vincere posse.
</quote>

<p>
I repeat it in Latin, because the equivocality, which equally
implies, that Pyrrhus could conquer the Romans, and the
Romans Pyrrhus, will not subsist in a translation. Under the
cover of such ambiguities, the god eluded all difficulties, and
was never in the wrong.
</p>

<p>
It must, however, be confessed, that sometimes the answer
of the oracle was clear and circumstantial. I have related, in
the history of Crœsus, the stratagem he made use of to assure
himself of the veracity of the oracle, which was, to demand of
it, by his ambassador, what he was doing at a certain time
prefixed. The oracle of Delphi replied, in verse, that he was
causing a tortoise and a lamb to be drest in a vessel of brass,
which was really the case. The emperor Trajan made a
similar trial of the god at Heliopolis, by sending him a letter
sealed up,<note place='foot'>One method of consulting the oracle was by sealed letters,
which were laid upon the altar of the god unopened.&mdash;Trans.</note>
to which he demanded an answer.<note place='foot'>Macrob.
l. i. <hi rend='italic'>Saturnal.</hi> c. 23.</note> The oracle
made no other return, than to command a blank paper, well
folded and sealed, to be delivered to him. Trajan, upon the
receipt of it, was struck with amazement to see an answer so
correspondent with his own letter, in which he knew he had
written nothing. The wonderful facility with which dæmons
can transfer themselves almost in an instant from place to
place, made it not impossible for them to give the two answers,
which I have last mentioned, and to foretell in one country,
what they had seen in another; this is Tertullian's opinion.<note place='foot'>Omnis
spiritus ales. Hoc et angeli et dæmones. Igitur momento ubique
sunt; totus orbis illis locus unus est: quid ubi geratur tam facilè sciunt, quàm
enuntiant. Velocitas divinitas creditur, quia substantia ignoratur.&mdash;Cæterùm
testudinem decoqui cum carnibus pecudis Pythius eo modo renunciavit, quo suprà
diximus. Momento apud Lydiam fuerat. Tertul <hi rend='italic'>in
Apolog.</hi>&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
Admitting it to be true, that some oracles have been followed
precisely by the events foretold, we may believe that God, to
punish the blind and sacrilegious credulity of the Pagans, has
sometimes permitted the dæmons to have a knowledge of things
to come, and to foretell them distinctly enough. Which conduct
of God, though very much above human comprehension, is
frequently attested in the Holy Scriptures.
</p>

<p>
It has been questioned, whether the oracles, mentioned in
profane history, should be ascribed to the operations of dæmons,
<pb n='xlvi'/><anchor id='Pgxlvi'/>
or only to the wickedness and imposture of men. Van
dale, a Dutch physician, has maintained the latter opinion,
and Monsieur Fontenelle, when a young man, adopted it, in
the persuasion (to use his own words) that it was indifferent,
as to the truth of Christianity, whether the oracles were the
effect of the agency of spirits, or a series of impostures. Father
Baltus, the Jesuit, professor of the Holy Scriptures in the
university of Strasburgh, has refuted them both in a very solid
treatise, wherein he demonstrates, invincibly, from the unanimous
authority of the Fathers, that dæmons were the real
agents in the oracles. He attacks, with equal force and success,
the rashness and presumption of the Anabaptist physician;
who, calling in question the capacity and discernment of those
holy doctors, secretly endeavoured to efface the high idea all
true believers should entertain of those great leaders of the
Church, and to depreciate their venerable authority, which is
so great a difficulty to all who deviate from the principles of
ancient tradition. Now, if that was ever certain and uniform
in any thing, it is so in this point; for all the Fathers of the
Church, and ecclesiastical writers of all ages, maintain, and
attest, that the devil was the author of idolatry in general, and
of oracles in particular.
</p>

<p>
This opinion does not hinder our believing that the priests
and priestesses were frequently guilty of fraud and imposture
in the answers of the oracles. For is not the devil the father
and prince of lies? In the Grecian history, we have seen
more than once the Delphic priestess suffer herself to be corrupted
by presents. It was from that motive, she persuaded
the Lacedæmonians to assist the people of Athens in the expulsion
of the thirty tyrants; that she caused Demaratus to be
divested of the royal dignity, to make way for Cleomenes; and
drest up an oracle to support the imposture of Lysander, when
he endeavoured to change the succession to the throne of
Sparta. And I am apt to believe that Themistocles, who well
knew the importance of acting against the Persians by sea,
inspired the god with the answer he gave, <q>to defend themselves
with wooden walls.</q> Demosthenes, convinced that the
oracles were frequently suggested by passion or interest, and
suspecting, with reason, that Philip had instructed them to
speak in his favour, boldly declared,<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>in
Demosth.</hi> p. 854.</note> that the Pythia <q>philippized;</q>
and bade the Athenians and Thebans remember that
Pericles and Epaminondas, instead of listening to, and amusing
themselves with, the frivolous answers of the oracle, those idle
<pb n='xlvii'/><anchor id='Pgxlvii'/>
bugbears of the base and cowardly, consulted only reason in
the choice and execution of their measures.
</p>

<p>
The same father Baltus examines, with equal success, a
second point in dispute, namely, the cessation of oracles. Mr.
Vandale, to oppose with some advantage a truth so glorious to
Jesus Christ, the subverter of idolatry, had falsified the sense
of the Fathers, by making them say, <q>that oracles ceased precisely
at the moment of Christ's birth.</q> The learned apologist
for the Fathers shows, that they all allege that oracles ceased
after our Saviour's birth, and the preaching of his Gospel; not
on a sudden, but in proportion as his salutary doctrines became
known to mankind, and gained ground in the world. This
unanimous opinion of the Fathers is confirmed by the unexceptionable
evidence of great numbers of the Pagans, who agree
with them as to the time when the oracles ceased.
</p>

<p>
What an honour to the Christian religion was this silence
imposed upon the oracles by the victory of Jesus Christ!
Every Christian had this power. Tertullian, in one of his
<hi rend='italic'>Apologies</hi>,<note place='foot'>Tertull. <hi rend='italic'>in
Apolog.</hi></note> challenges the Pagans to make the experiment, and
consents that a Christian should be put to death, if he did not
oblige these givers of oracles to confess themselves devils.
Lactantius informs us, that every Christian could silence them
by only the sign of the cross.<note place='foot'>Lib. <hi rend='italic'>de
verà sapient.</hi>, c. 27.</note> And all the world knows, that
when Julian the Apostate was at Daphne, a suburb of Antioch,
to consult Apollo, the god, notwithstanding all the sacrifices
offered to him, continued mute, and only recovered his speech
to answer those who inquired the cause of his silence, that they
must ascribe it to the interment of certain bodies in the neighbourhood.
Those were the bodies of Christian martyrs, amongst
which was that of St. Babylas.
</p>

<p>
This triumph of the Christian religion ought to give us a due
sense of our obligations to Jesus Christ, and, at the same time,
of the darkness to which all mankind were abandoned before
his coming. We have seen amongst the Carthaginians, fathers
and mothers, more cruel than wild beasts, inhumanly giving
up their children, and annually depopulating their cities, by
destroying the most vigorous of their youth, in obedience to the
bloody dictates of their oracles and false gods.<note place='foot'>Tam barbaros,
tam immanes fuisse homines, ut parricidium suum, id est tetrum
atque execrabib humano generi facinus, sacrificium vocarent. Cùm teneras atque
innocentes animas, quæ maximè est ætas parentibus dulcior, sine ullo respectu pietatis
extinguerunt, immanitatemque omnium bestiarum, quæ tamen fœtus suos amant,
seritate superarent. O dementiam insanabilem! Quid illis isti dii ampliùs facere
possent si essent iratissimi, quàm faciunt propitii? Cùm suos cultores parricidiis
inquinant, orbitatibus mactant, humanis sensibus spoliant. Lactant. l. i. c.
21.&mdash;Trans.</note> The victims
<pb n='xlviii'/><anchor id='Pgxlviii'/>
were chosen without any regard to rank, sex, age, or condition.
Such bloody executions were honoured with the name of
sacrifices, and designed to make the gods propitious. <q>What
greater evil,</q> cries Lactantius, <q>could they inflict in their most
violent displeasure, than thus to deprive their adorers of all
sense of humanity, to make them cut the throats of their own
children, and pollute their sacrilegious hands with such execrable
parricides?</q>
</p>

<p>
A thousand frauds and impostures, openly detected at Delphi,
and every where else, had not opened men's eyes, nor in the
least diminished the credit of the oracles; which subsisted
upwards of two thousand years, and was carried to an inconceivable
height, even in the minds of the greatest men, the most
profound philosophers, the most powerful princes, and generally
among the most civilized nations, and such as valued themselves
most upon their wisdom and policy. The estimation
they were in, may be judged from the magnificence of the
temple of Delphi, and the immense riches amassed in it through
the superstitious credulity of nations and monarchs.
</p>

<p>
The temple of Delphi having been burnt about the fifty-eighth
Olympiad, the Amphictyons, those celebrated judges of
Greece, took upon themselves the care of rebuilding it.<note place='foot'>Herod l.
ii. c 180; l. v. c. 62.</note> They
agreed with an architect for three hundred talents, which
amounts to nine hundred thousand livres.<note place='foot'>About
44,428<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> sterling.&mdash;Trans.</note> The cities of
Greece were to furnish that sum. The inhabitants of Delphi
were taxed a fourth part of it, and collected contributions in
all parts, even in foreign nations, for that service. Amasis, at
that time king of Egypt, and the Grecian inhabitants of his
country, contributed considerable sums towards it. The Alcmæonidæ,
a potent family of Athens, took upon themselves
the conduct of the building, and made it more magnificent, by
considerable additions of their own, than had been proposed in
the model.
</p>

<p>
Gyges, king of Lydia, and Crœsus, one of his successors,
enriched the temple of Delphi with an incredible number of
presents. Many other princes, cities, and private persons, by
their example, in a kind of emulation of each other, had
heaped up in it tripods, vases, tables, shields, crowns, chariots,
and statues of gold and silver of all sizes, equally infinite in
number and value. The presents of gold which Crœsus alone
made to this temple, amounted, according to Herodotus,<note place='foot'>Ibid.
l. i. c. 50, 51.</note> to upwards of 254 talents; that is, about
762,000 French livres;<note place='foot'>About 33,500<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>
sterling.&mdash;Trans.</note>
<pb n='xlix'/><anchor id='Pgxlix'/>
and perhaps those of silver to as much. Most of these presents
were in being in the time of Herodotus. Diodorus Siculus,<note place='foot'>Diod.
l. xvi p. 453.</note> adding those of other princes to them, makes their amount ten
thousand talents, or thirty millions of livres.<note place='foot'>About
1,300,000<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
Amongst the statues of gold, consecrated by Crœsus in
the temple of Delphi, was placed that of his female baker, the
occasion of which was this:<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>de
Pyth. orac.</hi> p. 401.</note> Alyattes, Crœsus's father, having
married a second wife, by whom he had children, she laid a
plan to get rid of her son-in-law, that the crown might descend
to her own issue. For this purpose she engaged the female
baker to put poison into a loaf, that was to be served at the
young prince's table. The woman, who was struck with horror
at the crime, (in which she ought to have had no part at all,)
gave Crœsus notice of it. The poisoned loaf was served to
the queen's own children, and their death secured the crown to
the lawful successor. When he ascended the throne, in gratitude
to his benefactress, he erected a statue to her in the
temple of Delphi. But, it may be said, could a person of so
mean a condition deserve so great an honour? Plutarch
answers in the affirmative; and with a much better title, he
says, than many of the so-much-vaunted conquerors and
heroes, who have acquired their fame only by murder and
devastation.
</p>

<p>
It is not to be wondered at, that such immense riches should
have tempted the avarice of mankind, and exposed Delphi to
being frequently pillaged. Without mentioning more ancient
times, Xerxes, who invaded Greece with a million of men,
endeavoured to seize upon the spoils of this temple. Above
an hundred years after, the Phoceans, near neighbours of
Delphi, plundered it at several times. The same rich booty
was the sole motive of the irruption of the Gauls into Greece
under Brennus. The guardian god of Delphi, if we may
believe historians, sometimes defended this temple by surprising
prodigies; and at others, either from impotence or
want of presence of mind, suffered himself to be plundered.
When Nero made this temple, so famous throughout the universe,
a visit, and found in it five hundred fine brass statues
of illustrious men and gods to his liking, which had been
consecrated to Apollo, (those of gold and silver having undoubtedly
disappeared upon his approach,) he ordered them
to be taken down, and shipping them on board his vessels,
carried them with him to Rome.
</p>

<pb n='l'/><anchor id='Pgl'/>

<p>
Those who are desirous of more particular information
concerning the oracles and riches of the temple of Delphi, may
consult some dissertations upon this subject, printed in the
<hi rend='italic'>Memoirs of the Academy of Belles Lettres</hi>,<note place='foot'>Vol.
iii.</note> of which I have
made good use, according to my custom.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<head>Of the Games and Combats.</head>

<p>
Games and combats made a part of the religion, and had a
share in almost all the festivals of the ancients; and for that
reason it is proper that they should find a place in this Work.
Whether we consider their origin, or the design of their institution,
we shall not be surprised at their being so prevalent in
the best governed states.
</p>

<p>
Hercules, Theseus, Castor and Pollux, and the greatest
heroes of antiquity, were not only the institutors or restorers
of them, but thought it glorious to share in the exercise of
them, and meritorious to succeed therein. These subduers of
monsters, and of the common enemies of mankind, thought
it no disgrace to them, to aspire to the victories in these combats;
nor that the new wreaths with which their brows were
encircled in the solemnization of these games, detracted from
the lustre of those they had before acquired. Hence the most
famous poets made these combats the subject of their verses;
the beauty of whose poetry, whilst it immortalized themselves,
seemed to promise an eternity of fame to those whose victories
it celebrated. Hence arose that uncommon ardour which animated
all Greece, to tread in the steps of those ancient heroes,
and like them, to signalize themselves in the public combats.
</p>

<p>
A reason more solid, and originating in the very nature of
these combats, and of the people who used them, may be given
for their prevalence. The Greeks, by nature warlike, and
equally intent upon forming the bodies and minds of their
youth, introduced these exercises, and annexed honours to
them, in order to prepare the younger sort for the profession of
arms, to confirm their health, to render them stronger and more
robust, to inure them to fatigues, and to make them intrepid
in close fight, in which, the use of fire-arms being then unknown,
strength of body generally decided the victory. These athletic
exercises supplied the place of those in use amongst our nobility,
as dancing, fencing, riding the great horse, &amp;c.; but they
did not confine themselves to a graceful mien, nor to the
beauties of a shape and face; they were for joining strength to
the charms of person.
</p>

<pb n='li'/><anchor id='Pgli'/>

<p>
It is true, these exercises, so illustrious by their founders,
and so useful in the ends at first proposed from them, introduced
public masters, who taught them to young persons, and
from practising them with success, made public show and ostentation
of their skill. This sort of men applied themselves
solely to the practice of this art, and carrying it to an excess,
they formed it into a kind of science, by the addition of rules
and refinements; often challenging each other out of a vain
emulation, till at length they degenerated into a profession of
people, who, without any other employment or merit, exhibited
themselves as a sight for the diversion of the public. Our
dancing-masters are not unlike them in this respect, whose
natural and original designation was to teach youth a graceful
manner of walking, and a good address; but now we see them
mount the stage, and perform ballets in the garb of comedians,
capering, jumping, skipping, and making variety of strange
unnatural motions. We shall see in the sequel, what opinion
the wiser among the ancients had of their professed combatants
and wrestling-masters.
</p>

<p>
There were four games solemnized in Greece. The <hi rend='italic'>Olympic</hi>,
so called from Olympia, otherwise Pisa, a town of Elis in Peloponnesus,
near which they were celebrated, after the expiration
of every four years, in honour of Jupiter Olympicus. The
<hi rend='italic'>Pythian</hi>, sacred to Apollo Pythius,<note place='foot'>Several
reasons are given for this name.&mdash;Trans.</note> so called from the serpent
Python, killed by him; they were celebrated at Delphi every
four years. The <hi rend='italic'>Nemæan</hi>, which took their name from
Nemæa, a city and forest of Peloponnesus, and were either
instituted or restored by Hercules, after he had slain the lion
of the Nemæan forest. They were solemnized every two years.
And lastly, the <hi rend='italic'>Isthmian</hi>, celebrated upon the isthmus of
Corinth, every four years, in honour of Neptune. Theseus<note place='foot'>Pausan.
l. ii. p. 88.</note> was the restorer of them, and they continued even after the
ruin of Corinth. That persons might be present at these
public sports with greater quiet and security, there was a general
suspension of arms, and cessation of hostilities throughout
all Greece, during the time of their celebration.
</p>

<p>
In these games, which were solemnized with incredible magnificence,
and drew together a prodigious concourse of spectators
and combatants from all parts, a simple wreath was all
the reward of the victors. In the Olympic games, it was composed
of wild olive. In the Pythian, of laurel. In the Nemæan,
of green parsley;<note place='foot'>Apium.</note> and in the Isthmian, of the same
<pb n='lii'/><anchor id='Pglii'/>
herb dried. The institutors of these games wished that it
should be implied from hence, that honour alone, and not
mean and sordid interest, ought to be the motive of great
actions. Of what were men not capable, accustomed to act
solely from so glorious a principle! We have seen in the
Persian war,<note place='foot'>Herod. l. viii. c. 26.</note>
that Tigranes, one of the most considerable captains
in the army of Xerxes, having heard the prizes in the
Grecian games described, cried out with astonishment, addressing
himself to Mardonius, who commanded in chief, <q>Heavens!
against what men are you leading us? Insensible to
interest, they combat only for glory!</q><note place='foot'>Παπαὶ, Μαρδόνιε,
κόιους ἐπ᾽ ἄνδρας ἤγαγες μαχησομένους ἡμέας, οἵ οὐ περ᾽
χρημάσων τὸν αγῶνα ποιεῦνται, ἀλλά περὶ ἀρετῆς.&mdash;Trans.</note> Which exclamation,
though looked upon by Xerxes as an effect of abject fear,
abounds with sense and judgment.
</p>

<p>
It was from the same principle that the Romans, whilst
they bestowed upon other occasions crowns of gold of great
value, persisted always in giving only a wreath of oaken leaves
to him who had saved the life of a citizen.<note place='foot'>Plin.
l. xvi. c. 4.</note> <q>O manners,
worthy of eternal remembrance!</q> cried Pliny, in relating this
laudable custom, <q>O grandeur, truly Roman, that would assign
no other reward but honour, for the preservation of a citizen!
a service, indeed, above all reward; thereby sufficiently evincing
their opinion, that it was criminal to save a man's life
from the motive of lucre and interest!</q> <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>O mores
æternos, qui tanta opera honore solo donaverint; et cùm reliquas coronas
auro commendarent, salutem civis in pretio esse noluerint,
clarâ professione servari quidem hominem nefus esse lucri
causâ!</foreign>
</p>

<p>
Amongst all the Grecian games, the Olympic held undeniably
the first rank, and that for three reasons. They were
sacred to Jupiter, the greatest of the gods; instituted by
Hercules, the first of the heroes; and celebrated with more
pomp and magnificence, amidst a greater concourse of spectators
attracted from all parts, than any of the rest.
</p>

<p>
If Pausanias may be believed,<note place='foot'>Pausan. l. v. p.
297.</note> women were prohibited to
be present at them upon pain of death; and during their continuance,
it was ordained, that no woman should approach the
place where the games were celebrated, or pass on that side of
the river Alpheus. One only was so bold as to violate this law,
and slipt in disguise amongst those who were training the
wrestlers. She was tried for the offence, and would have
suffered the penalty enacted by the law, if the judges, in regard
to her father, her brother, and her son, who had all been victors
<pb n='liii'/><anchor id='Pgliii'/>
in the Olympic games, had not pardoned her offence, and saved
her life.
</p>

<p>
This law was very conformable with the manners of the
Greeks, amongst whom the ladies were very reserved, seldom
appeared in public, had separate apartments, called
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Gynæcea</foreign>,
and never ate at table with the men when strangers were
present. It was certainly inconsistent with decency to admit
them at some of the games, as those of wrestling and the Pancratium,
in which the combatants fought naked.
</p>

<p>
The same Pausanias tells us in another place,<note place='foot'>Pausan.
l. vi. p. 382.</note> that the
priestess of Ceres had an honourable seat in these games, and
that virgins were not denied the liberty of being present at
them. For my part, I cannot conceive the reason of such
inconsistency, which indeed seems incredible.
</p>

<p>
The Greeks thought nothing comparable to the victory in
these games. They looked upon it as the perfection of glory,
and did not believe it permitted to mortals to desire any thing
beyond it. Cicero assures us,<note place='foot'>Olympiorum victoria, Græcis
consulatus ille antiquus videbatur. <hi rend='italic'>Tuscul.
Quæst.</hi> l. ii. n. 41.&mdash;Trans.</note> that with them it was no less
honourable than the consular dignity in its original splendour
with the ancient Romans. And in another place he says,<note place='foot'>Olympionicam
esse apud Græcos propè majus fuit et gloriosius quàm Romæ
triumphâsse. <hi rend='italic'>Pro Flacco</hi>, n. 31.&mdash;Trans.</note>
that to conquer at Olympia, was almost, in the estimation of
the Grecians, more great and glorious, than to receive the
honour of a triumph at Rome. Horace speaks in still stronger
terms of this kind of victory. He is not afraid to
say,<note place='foot'><p>&mdash;&mdash;Palmaque nobilis<lb/>
Terrarum dominos evehit ad deos.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Od.</hi> i. l. i.
</p>
<p>
Sive quos Elea domum reducit<lb/>
Palma cœlestes
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Od.</hi> ii. l. i.&mdash;Trans.</p></note> that
<q>it exalts the victor above human nature; they were no longer
men but gods.</q>
</p>

<p>
We shall see hereafter what extraordinary honours were paid
the victor, of which one of the most affecting was, to date the
year with his name. Nothing could more effectually stimulate
their endeavours, and make them regardless of expenses, than
the assurance of immortalizing their names, which, through all
future ages would be enrolled in their annals, and stand in the
front of all laws made in the same year with the victory. To
this motive may be added the joy of knowing, that their praises
would be celebrated by the most famous poets, and form the
subject of conversation in the most illustrious assemblies; for
<pb n='liv'/><anchor id='Pgliv'/>
these odes were sung in every house, and formed a part in
every entertainment. What could be a more powerful incentive
to a people, who had no other object and aim than that of
human glory?
</p>

<p>
I shall confine myself upon this head to the Olympic games,
which continued five days; and shall describe, in as brief a
manner as possible, the several kinds of combats of which they
were composed. M. Burette has treated this subject in several
dissertations, printed in the <hi rend='italic'>Memoirs of the Academy of Belles
Lettres</hi>; wherein purity, perspicuity, and elegance of style are
united with profound erudition. I make no scruple in appropriating
to my use the riches of my brethren; and, in what I
have already said upon the Olympic games, have made very
free with the late Abbé Massieu's remarks upon the <hi rend='italic'>Odes</hi> of
Pindar.
</p>

<p>
The combats which had the greatest share in the solemnity
of the public games, were boxing, wrestling, the pancratium,
the discus or quoit, and racing. To these may be added the
exercises of leaping, throwing the dart, and that of the trochus
or wheel; but as these were neither important nor of any great
reputation, I shall content myself with having only mentioned
them in this place. For the better methodizing the particulars
of these games and exercises, it will be necessary to begin with
an account of the Athletæ, or combatants.
</p>

<div>
<head>Of the Athletæ, or Combatants.</head>

<p>
The term Athletæ is derived from the Greek word ἆθλος,
which signifies labour, combat. This name was given to those
who exercised themselves with an intention to dispute the
prizes in the public games. The art by which they formed
themselves for these encounters, was called Gymnastic, from
the Athletæ's practising naked.
</p>

<p>
Those who were designed for this profession frequented, from
their most tender age, the Gymnasia or Palæstræ, which were
a kind of academies maintained for that purpose at the public
expense. In these places, such young people were under the
direction of different masters, who employed the most effectual
methods to inure their bodies for the fatigues of the public
games, and to train them for the combats. The regimen they
were under was very hard and severe. At first they had no
other nourishment than dried figs, nuts, soft cheese, and a
coarse heavy sort of bread, called μάζα. They were absolutely
<pb n='lv'/><anchor id='Pglv'/>
forbidden the use of wine, and enjoined continence; which
Horace expresses thus:<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Art. Poet.</hi> v. 412.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Qui studet optatam cursu contingere metam</l>
<l>Multa tulit fecitque puer, sudavit et alsit,</l>
<l>Abstinuit venere et vino.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Who in th' Olympic race the prize would gain,</l>
<l>Has borne from early youth fatigue and pain,</l>
<l>Excess of heat and cold has often try'd,</l>
<l>Love's softness banish'd, and the glass deny'd.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
St. Paul, by a comparison drawn from the Athletæ, exhorts
the Corinthians, near whose city the Isthmian games were
celebrated, to a sober and penitent life. <q>Those who strive,</q>
says he, <q>for the mastery, are temperate in all things: Now
they do it to obtain a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible.</q>
Tertullian uses the same thought to encourage the martyrs.<note place='foot'>Nempe
enim et Athletæ segregantur ad strictiorem disciplinam, ut robori ædificando
vacent; continentui à luxuriâ, à cibis lætioribus, à potu jucundiore; coguntur,
cruciantur, fatigantur. Tertul. <hi rend='italic'>ad Martyr.</hi>&mdash;Trans.</note>
He makes a comparison from what the hopes of victory made
the Athletæ endure. He repeats the severe and painful exercises
they were obliged to undergo; the continual denial and
constraint, in which they passed the best years of their lives;
and the voluntary privation which they imposed upon themselves,
of all that was most pleasing and grateful to their passions.
It is true, the Athletæ did not always observe so severe
a regimen, but at length substituted in its stead a voracity and
indolence extremely remote from it.
</p>

<p>
The Athletæ, before their exercises,<note place='foot'>The persons employed in
this office were called <hi rend='italic'>Aliptæ</hi>.&mdash;Trans.</note> were rubbed
with oils and ointments to make their bodies more supple and vigorous.
At first they made use of a belt, with an apron or scarf fastened
to it, for their more decent appearance in the combats; but
one of the combatants happening to lose the victory by this
covering's falling off, that accident was the occasion of sacrificing
modesty to convenience, and retrenching the apron for
the future. The Athletæ were naked only in some exercises,
as wrestling, boxing, the pancratium, and the foot-race. They
practised a kind of novitiate in the Gymnasia for ten months,
to accomplish themselves in the several exercises by assiduous
application; and this they did in the presence of such, as
curiosity or idleness conducted to look on. But when the
celebration of the Olympic games drew nigh, the Athletæ who
were to appear in them were kept to double exercise.
</p>

<pb n='lvi'/><anchor id='Pglvi'/>

<p>
Before they were admitted to combat, other proofs were
required; as to birth, none but Greeks were to be received.
It was also necessary, that their manners should be unexceptionable,
and their condition free. No foreigner was admitted
to combat in the Olympic games; and when Alexander, the
son of Amyntas, king of Macedon, presented himself to dispute
the prize, his competitors, without any regard to the royal
dignity, opposed his reception as a Macedonian, and consequently
a barbarian and a stranger; nor could the judges be
prevailed upon to admit him, till he had proved in due form
his family originally descended from the Argives.
</p>

<p>
The persons who presided in the games were called
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Agonothetæ</foreign>,
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Athlothetæ</foreign>, and
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Hellanodicæ</foreign>: they registered the name
and country of each champion; and upon the opening of the
games a herald proclaimed the names of the combatants. They
were then made to take an oath, that they would religiously
observe the several laws prescribed in each kind of combat,
and do nothing contrary to the established orders and regulations
of the games. Fraud, artifice, and excessive violence,
were absolutely prohibited; and the maxim so generally received
elsewhere,<note place='foot'>Dolus an virtus, quis in noste requirat?&mdash;Trans.</note>
that it is indifferent whether an enemy is
conquered by deceit or valour, was banished from these combats.
The address of a combatant, expert in all the niceties
of his art, who knows how to shift and ward dexterously, to put
the change upon his adversary with art and subtlety, and to
improve the least advantages, must not be confounded here
with the cowardly and knavish cunning of one who, without
regard to the laws prescribed, employs the most unfair means
to vanquish his competitor. Those who disputed the prize in
the several kinds of combats, drew lots for their precedency in
them.
</p>

<p>
It is time to bring our champions to blows, and to run over the
different kinds of combats, in which they exercised themselves.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Of Wrestling.</head>

<p>
Wrestling is one of the most ancient exercises of which we
have any knowledge, having been practised in the time of the
patriarchs, as the wrestling of the angel with Jacob proves.<note place='foot'>Gen.
xxxii. 24.</note> Jacob supported the angel's attack so vigorously, that the
latter, perceiving he could not throw so rough a wrestler, was
reduced to make him lame by touching the sinew of his thigh,
which immediately shrunk up.
</p>

<pb n='lvii'/><anchor id='Pglvii'/>

<p>
Wrestling, among the Greeks, as well as other nations, was
practised at first with simplicity, little art, and in a natural
manner; the weight of the body, and the strength of the
muscles, having more share in it than address and skill.
Theseus was the first that reduced it to method, and refined it
by the rules of art. He was also the first who established the
public schools, called <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Palæstræ</foreign>,
where the young people had masters to instruct them in it.
</p>

<p>
The wrestlers, before they began the combat, were rubbed
all over in a rough manner, and afterwards anointed with oils,
which added to the strength and flexibility of their limbs. But
as this unction, by making the skin too slippery, rendered it
difficult for them to take good hold of each other, they remedied
that inconvenience, sometimes by rolling themselves in
the dust of the Palæstra, sometimes by throwing a fine sand
upon each other, kept for that purpose in the Xystæ, or porticoes
of the Gymnasia.
</p>

<p>
Thus prepared, the wrestlers began their combat. They
were matched two against two, and sometimes several couples
contended at the same time. In this combat, the whole aim
and design of the wrestlers was to throw their adversary upon
the ground. Both strength and art were employed for this
purpose: they seized each other by the arms, drew forwards,
pushed backwards, used many distortions and twistings of the
body; locking their limbs into each other's, seizing by the
neck, throttling, pressing in their arms, struggling, plying on all
sides, lifting from the ground, dashing their heads together like
rams, and twisting one another's necks. The most considerable
advantage in the wrestler's art, was to make himself master of
his adversary's legs, of which a fall was the immediate consequence.
From whence Plautus says in his <hi rend='italic'>Pseudolus</hi>, speaking
of wine, <q>He is a dangerous wrestler, he presently trips up
the heels.</q><note place='foot'>Captat pedes primùm, luctator dolosus
est.&mdash;Trans.</note> The Greek terms υποσκελίζειν and πτερνίζειν, and
the Latin word <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>supplantare</foreign>, seem to imply,
that one of these arts consisted in stooping down to seize the antagonist under
the soles of his feet, and in raising them up to give him a fall.
</p>

<p>
In this manner the Athletæ wrestled standing, the combat
ending with the fall of one of the competitors. But when it
happened that the wrestler who was down, drew his adversary
along with him, either by art or accident, the combat continued
upon the sand, the antagonists tumbling and twining with each
other in a thousand different ways, till one of them got uppermost,
and compelled the other to ask quarter, and confess
<pb n='lviii'/><anchor id='Pglviii'/>
himself vanquished. There was a third sort of wrestling, called
Ἀκροχειρισμὸς, from the Athletæ's using only their hands in it,
without taking hold of the body, as in the other kinds; and
this exercise served as a prelude to the greater combat. It
consisted in intermingling their fingers, and in squeezing them
with all their force; in pushing one another, by joining the
palms of their hands together; in twisting their fingers, wrists,
and other joints of the arm, without the assistance of any other
member; and the victory was his, who obliged his opponent to
ask quarter.
</p>

<p>
The combatants were to fight three times successively, and
to throw their antagonists at least twice, before the prize could
be adjudged to them.
</p>

<p>
Homer describes the wrestling of Ajax and Ulysses; Ovid,
that of Hercules and Achelous; Lucan, of Hercules and
Antæus; and Statius, in his <hi rend='italic'>Thebaid</hi>, that of Tydeus and
Agylleus.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>. l. xxiii v. 708,
&amp;c. Ovid. <hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi> l. ix. v. 31, &amp;c.
<hi rend='italic'>Phars.</hi> l. iv. v. 612. Stat. l. vi. v. 847.</note>
</p>

<p>
The wrestlers of greatest reputation amongst the Greeks,
were Milo of Crotona, whose history I have related elsewhere
at large, and Polydamas. The latter, alone and without arms,
killed a furious lion upon mount Olympus, in imitation of
Hercules, whom he proposed to himself as a model in this
action. Another time having seized a bull by one of his
hinder legs, the beast could not get loose without leaving his
hoof in his hands. He could hold a chariot behind, while the
coachman whipt his horses in vain to make them go forward.
Darius Nothus, king of Persia, hearing of his prodigious
strength, was desirous of seeing him, and invited him to Susa.
Three soldiers of that Prince's guard, and of that band which
the Persians called <q>immortal,</q> esteemed the most warlike of
their troops, were ordered to fall upon him. Our champion
fought and killed them all three.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Of Boxing, or the Cestus.</head>

<p>
Boxing is a combat at blows with the fist, from whence it
derives its name. The combatants covered their fists with a
kind of offensive arms, called <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Cestus</foreign>,
and their heads with a sort of leather cap, to defend their temples and ears, which
were most exposed to blows, and to deaden their violence.
The Cestus was a kind of gauntlet, or glove, made of straps of
leather, and plated with brass, lead or iron. Their use was to
<pb n='lix'/><anchor id='Pglix'/>
strengthen the hands of the combatants, and to add violence to
their blows.
</p>

<p>
Sometimes the Athletæ came immediately to the most violent
blows, and began their onset in the most furious manner.
Sometimes whole hours passed in harassing and fatiguing each
other, by a continual extension of their arms, rendering each
other's blows ineffectual, and endeavouring by that sparring to
keep off their adversary. But when they fought with the
utmost fury, they aimed chiefly at the head and face, which
parts they were most careful to defend, by either avoiding or
parrying the blows made at them. When a combatant came
on to throw himself with all his force and vigour upon another,
they had a surprising address in avoiding the attack, by a
nimble turn of the body, which threw the imprudent adversary
down, and deprived him of the victory.
</p>

<p>
However fierce the combatants were against each other,
their being exhausted by the length of the combat, would
frequently reduce them to the necessity of making a truce;
upon which the battle was suspended by mutual consent for
some minutes, that were employed in recovering their fatigue,
and rubbing off the sweat in which they were bathed: after
which they renewed the fight, till one of them, by letting fall
his arms through weakness and faintness, explained that he
could no longer support the pain or fatigue, and desired
quarter; which was confessing himself vanquished.
</p>

<p>
Boxing was one of the roughest and most dangerous of the
gymnastic combats; because, besides the danger of being
crippled, the combatants ran the hazard of their lives. They
sometimes fell down dead, or dying upon the sand; though
that seldom happened, except the vanquished person persisted
too long in not acknowledging his defeat: yet it was common
for them to quit the fight with a countenance so disfigured,
that it was not easy to know them afterwards; carrying away
with them the sad marks of their vigorous resistance, such as
bruises and contusions in the face, the loss of an eye, their
teeth knocked out, their jaws broken, or some more considerable
fracture.
</p>

<p>
We find in the poets, both Latin and Greek, several descriptions
of this kind of combat. In Homer, that of Epeus and
Euryalus; in Theocritus, of Pollux and Amycus; in Apollonius
Rhodius, the same battle of Pollux and Amycus; in Virgil,
that of Dares and Entellus; and in Statius, and Valerius
Flaccus, of several other combatants.<note place='foot'>Dioscoi.
<hi rend='italic'>Idyl.</hi> xxii. <hi rend='italic'>Argonautic</hi>, l. ii.
<hi rend='italic'>Æneid.</hi> l. v. <hi rend='italic'>Thebaid.</hi> l. vii.
<hi rend='italic'>Argonaut.</hi> l. iv.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='lx'/><anchor id='Pglx'/>

<div>
<head>Of the Pancratium.</head>

<p>
The Pancratium was so called from two Greek
words,<note place='foot'>Πᾶν κράτος.</note> which
signify that the whole force of the body was necessary for
succeeding in it. It united boxing and wrestling in the same
fight, borrowing from one its manner of struggling and flinging,
and from the other, the art of dealing blows and of avoiding
them with success. In wrestling it was not permitted to strike
with the hand, nor in boxing to seize each other in the
manner of the wrestlers; but in the Pancratium, it was not
only allowed to make use of all the gripes and artifices of
wrestling, but the hands and feet, and even the teeth and nails,
might be employed to conquer an antagonist.
</p>

<p>
This combat was the most rough and dangerous. A Pancratiast
in the Olympic games (called Arrichion, or Arrachion,)
perceiving himself almost suffocated by his adversary, who had
got fast hold of him by the throat, at the same time that he
held him by the foot, broke one of his enemy's toes, the extreme
anguish of which obliged him to ask quarter at the very instant
that Arrichion himself expired. The Agonothetæ crowned
Arrichion, though dead, and proclaimed him victor. Philostratus
has left us a very lively description of a painting, which
represented this combat.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Of the Discus, or Quoit.</head>

<p>
The Discus was a kind of quoit of a round form, made sometimes
of wood, but more frequently of stone, lead, or other
metal; as iron or brass. Those who used this exercise were
called Discoboli, that is, flingers of the Discus. The epithet
κατωμάδιος, which signifies <q>borne upon the shoulders,</q> given
to this instrument by Homer, sufficiently shows, that it was of
too great a weight to be carried from place to place in the
hands only, and that the shoulders were necessary for the
support of such a burden for any length of time.
</p>

<p>
The intent of this exercise, as of almost all the others, was
to invigorate the body, and to make men more capable of
supporting the weight and use of arms. In war they were
often obliged to carry such loads, as appear excessive in these
days, either of provisions, fascines, palisades; or in scaling of
walls, when, to equal the height of them, several of the besiegers
mounted upon the shoulders of each other.
</p>

<p>
The Athletæ, in hurling the Discus, put themselves into
<pb n='lxi'/><anchor id='Pglxi'/>
the posture best adapted to add force to their cast; that is,
they advanced one foot, upon which they leaned the whole
weight of their bodies. They then poised the Discus in their
hands, and whirling it round several times almost horizontally,
to add force to its motion, they threw it off with the joint
strength of hands, arms, and body, which had all a share in
the vigour of the discharge. He that flung the Discus farthest
was the victor.
</p>

<p>
The most famous painters and sculptors of antiquity, in their
endeavours to represent naturally the attitudes of the Discoboli,
have left to posterity many masterpieces in their several arts.
Quintilian exceedingly extols a statue of that kind, which had
been finished with infinite care and application by the celebrated
Myron: <q>What can be more finished,</q> says he, <q>or
express more happily the muscular distortions of the body in
the exercise of the Discus, than the Discobolus of Myron?</q><note place='foot'>Quid
tam distortum et elaboratum, quàm est ille Discobolos Myronis? Quintil.
l. ii. c. 13.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Of the Pentathlum.</head>

<p>
The Greeks gave this name to an exercise composed of five
others. It is the common opinion, that those five exercises
were wrestling, running, leaping, throwing the dart, and the
Discus. It is believed that this sort of combat was decided in
one day, and sometimes the same morning: and that to obtain
the prize, which was single, it was required that a combatant
should be the victor in all those exercises.
</p>

<p>
The exercise of leaping, and throwing the javelin, of which
the first consisted in leaping a certain length, and the other in
hitting a mark with a javelin at a certain distance, contributed
to the forming of a soldier, by making him nimble and active
in battle, and expert in flinging the spear and dart.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Of Races.</head>

<p>
Of all the exercises which the Athletæ cultivated with so
much pains and industry to enable them to appear in the public
games, running held the foremost rank. The Olympic games
generally opened with races, and were solemnized at first with
no other exercise.
</p>

<p>
The place where the Athletæ exercised themselves in running
was generally called the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Stadium</foreign>
by the Greeks; as was that wherein they disputed in earnest for the prize. As the lists or
<pb n='lxii'/><anchor id='Pglxii'/>
course for these games was at first but one Stadium<note place='foot'>The Stadium
was a measure of distance among the Greeks, and was, according
to Herodotus, l. ii. c. 149, six hundred feet in length. Pliny says, l. ii. c. 23, that
it was six hundred and twenty-five. Those two authors may be reconciled by considering
the difference between the Greek and Roman foot; besides which, the length of the
Stadium varies, according to the difference of times and places.&mdash;Trans.</note>
in length, it took its name from its measure, and was called the Stadium,
whether precisely of that extent, or of a much greater. Under
that denomination was included not only the space in which
the Athletæ ran, but also that which contained the spectators
of the gymnastic games. The place where the Athletæ contended
was called Scamma, from its lying lower than the rest
of the Stadium, on each side of which, and at the extremity
ran an ascent or kind of terrace, covered with seats and
benches, upon which the spectators were seated. The most
remarkable parts of the Stadium were its entrance, middle,
and extremity.
</p>

<p>
The entrance of the course, from whence the competitors
started, was marked at first only by a line drawn on the sand
from side to side of the Stadium. To that at length was substituted
a kind of barrier, which was only a cord strained tight
in the front of the horses or men that were to run. It was
sometimes a rail of wood. The opening of this barrier was
the signal for the racers to start.
</p>

<p>
The middle of the Stadium was remarkable only by the circumstance
of having the prizes allotted to the victors set up
there. St. Chrysostom<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hom.</hi> lv.
<hi rend='italic'>in Matth.</hi> c. 16.&mdash;Trans.</note> draws a fine comparison
from this custom. <q>As the judges,</q> says he, <q>in the races and other
games, expose in the midst of the Stadium, to the view of the
champions, the crowns which they are to receive; in like manner
the Lord, by the mouth of his prophets, has placed in the
midst of the course, the prizes which he designs for those who
have the courage to contend for them.</q>
</p>

<p>
At the extremity of the Stadium was a goal, where the footraces
ended, but in those of chariots and horses they were to
run several times round it without stopping, and afterwards
conclude the race by regaining the other extremity of the lists,
from whence they started.
</p>

<p>
There were three kinds of races, the chariot, the horse, and
the footrace. I shall begin with the last, as the most simple,
natural, and ancient.
</p>

<pb n='lxiii'/><anchor id='Pglxiii'/>

<div>
<head>1. Of the Foot-race.</head>

<p>
The runners, of whatever number they were, ranged themselves
in a line, after having drawn lots for their places.
Whilst they waited the signal to start, they practised, by way
of prelude, various motions to awaken their activity, and to
keep their limbs pliable and in a right temper.<note place='foot'><p>&mdash;&mdash;Tunc
ritè citatos<lb/>
Explorant, acuuntque gradus, variasque per artes<lb/>
Instimulant docto languentia membra tumultu.<lb/>
Poplite nunc flexo sidunt, nunc lubrica forti<lb/>
Pectora collidunt plausu; nunc ignea tollunt<lb/>
Crura, brevemque fugam nec opino fine reponunt.
</p>
<p>
Stat. <hi rend='italic'>Theb.</hi> l. vi v. 587, &amp;c.
</p>
<p>
They try, they rouse their speed, with various arts;<lb/>
Their languid limbs they prompt to act their parts.<lb/>
Now with bent hams, amidst the practis'd crowd,<lb/>
They sit; now strain their lungs, and shout aloud<lb/>
Now a short flight with fiery steps they trace,<lb/>
And with a sudden stop abridge the mimic race.
</p>
<p>
&mdash;Trans.</p></note> They kept
themselves in wind by small leaps, and making little excursions,
that were a kind of trial of their speed and agility. Upon the
signal being given they flew towards the goal, with a rapidity
scarce to be followed by the eye, which was solely to decide
the victory. For the Agonistic laws prohibited, under the
penalty of infamy, the attaining it by any foul method.
</p>

<p>
In the simple race the extent of the Stadium was run but
once, at the end of which the prize attended the victor, that is,
he who came in first. In the race called Δίαυλος, the competitors
ran twice that length; that is, after having arrived at
the goal, they returned to the barrier. To these may be added
a third sort, called Δολιχὸς, which was the longest of all, as its
name implies, and was composed of several Diauli. Sometimes
it consisted of twenty-four Stadia backwards and forwards,
turning twelve times round the goal.
</p>

<p>
There were some runners in ancient times, as well among
the Greeks as Romans, who have been much celebrated for
their swiftness. Pliny tells us,<note place='foot'>Plin. l. vii.
c. 20.</note> that it was thought prodigious
in Phidippides to run eleven hundred and forty Stadia<note place='foot'>57
leagues.</note> between
Athens and Lacedæmon in the space of two days, till Anystis
of the latter place, and Philonides, the runner of Alexander
the Great, went twelve hundred Stadia<note place='foot'>60 leagues.</note>
in one day, from Sicyon to Elis. These runners were denominated ἡμεροδρόμους
<pb n='lxiv'/><anchor id='Pglxiv'/>
as we find in that passage of Herodotus, which mentions
Phidippides.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. vi. c. 106.</note>
In the consulate of Fonteius and Vipsanus, in the
reign of Nero, a boy of nine years old ran seventy-five thousand
paces<note place='foot'>30 leagues.</note> between noon
and night. Pliny adds, that in his time there were runners, who
ran one hundred and sixty thousand paces<note place='foot'>More
than 53 leagues.</note> in the circus. Our wonder at such a prodigious
speed will increase, (continues he,)<note place='foot'>Val. Max. l.
v. c. 5.</note> if we reflect, that when
Tiberius went to Germany to his brother Drusius, then at the
point of death, he could not arrive there in less than four-and-twenty
hours, though the distance was but two hundred thousand
paces,<note place='foot'>67 leagues.</note> and he changed his carriage
three times,<note place='foot'>He had only a guide and one officer
with him.&mdash;Trans.</note> and went with the utmost diligence.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>2. Of the Horse-races.</head>

<p>
The race of a single horse with a rider was less celebrated
among the ancients, yet it had its favourers amongst the most
considerable persons, and even kings themselves, and was
attended with uncommon glory to the victor. Pindar, in his
first ode, celebrates a victory of this kind, obtained by Hiero,
king of Syracuse, to whom he gives the title of Κέλης, that is,
<q>Victor in the horse-race;</q> which name was given to the horses
carrying only a single rider, Κέλητες. Sometimes the rider led
another horse by the bridle, and then the horses were called
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Desultorii</foreign>, and their
riders <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Desultores</foreign>; because, after a number
of turns in the Stadium, they changed horses, by dexterously
vaulting from one to the other. A surprising address
was necessary upon this occasion, especially in an age unacquainted
with the use of stirrups, and when the horses had
no saddles, which made the leap still more difficult. Among
the African troops there were also cavalry,<note place='foot'>Nec omnes
Numidæ in dextro locati cornu, sed quibus desultorum in modum
binos trahentibus equos, inter acerrimam sæpe pugnam, in recentem equum ex fesso
armatis transultare mos erat; tanta velocitas ipsis, tamque docile equorum genus
est. Liv. l. xxiii.&mdash;Trans.</note> called
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Desultores</foreign>,
who vaulted from one horse to another, as occasion required;
and these were generally Numidians.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>3. Of the Chariot-races.</head>

<p>
This kind of race was the most renowned of all the exercises
used in the games of the ancients, and that from whence most
honour redounded to the victors; which is not to be wondered
<pb n='lxv'/><anchor id='Pglxv'/>
at, if we consider whence it arose. It is plain that it was derived
from the constant custom of princes, heroes, and great
men, of fighting in battle upon chariots. Homer has an infinity
of examples of this kind. This custom being admitted,
it is natural to suppose it very agreeable to these heroes, to
have their charioteers as expert as possible in driving, as their
success depended, in a very great measure, upon the address
of their drivers. It was anciently, therefore, only to persons
of the first consideration that this office was confided. Hence
arose a laudable emulation to excel others in the art of guiding
a chariot, and a kind of necessity to practise it very much, in
order to succeed. The high rank of the persons who made use
of chariots ennobled, as it always happens, an exercise peculiar
to them. The other exercises were adapted to private soldiers
and horsemen, as wrestling, running, and the single horse-race;
but the use of chariots in the field was always reserved to
princes, and generals of armies.
</p>

<p>
Hence it was, that all those who presented themselves in the
Olympic games to dispute the prize in the chariot-races, were
persons considerable either for their riches, their birth, their
employments, or great actions. Kings themselves eagerly
aspired to this glory, from the belief that the title of victor in
these games was scarce inferior to that of conqueror, and that
the Olympic palm added new dignity to the splendours of a
throne. Pindar's odes inform us, that Gelon and Hiero, kings
of Syracuse, were of that opinion. Dionysius, who reigned
there long after them, carried the same ambition much higher.
Philip of Macedon had these victories stampt upon his coins,
and seemed as much gratified with them as with those obtained
against the enemies of his state. All the world knows the
answer of Alexander the Great on this subject.<note place='foot'>Plut.
<hi rend='italic'>in Alex.</hi> p. 666.</note> When his
friends asked him whether he would not dispute the prize of
the races in these games? <q>Yes,</q> said he, <q>if kings were to
be my antagonists.</q> Which shows, that he would not have
disdained these contests, if there had been competitors in them
worthy of him.
</p>

<p>
The chariots were generally drawn by two or four horses,
ranged abreast; <foreign rend='italic'>bigæ</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>quadrigæ</foreign>. Sometimes mules supplied
the place of horses, and then the chariot was called ἀπήνη.
Pindar, in the fifth ode of his first book, celebrates one
Psaumis, who had obtained a triple victory; one by a chariot
drawn by four horses, τεθρίππῳ; another by one drawn by
mules, ἀπήνη; and the third by a single horse, κέλητι, which
the title of the ode expresses.
</p>

<pb n='lxvi'/><anchor id='Pglxvi'/>

<p>
These chariots, upon a signal given, started together from a
place called <foreign rend='italic'>Carceres</foreign>. Their places were regulated by
lot, which was not an indifferent circumstance as to the victory;
for as they were to turn round a boundary, the chariot on the
left was nearer than those on the right, which consequently had
a greater compass to take. It appears from several passages
in Pindar, and especially from one in Sophocles, which I shall
cite very soon, that they ran twelve times round the Stadium.
He that came in first the twelfth round was victor. The chief
art consisted in taking the best ground at the turning of the
boundary: for if the charioteer drove too near it, he was in
danger of dashing the chariot to pieces; and if he kept too
wide of it, his nearest antagonist might cut between him, and
get foremost.
</p>

<p>
It is obvious that these chariot-races could not be run without
some danger; for as the motion<note place='foot'><p>Metaque fervidis
Evitata rotis. Horat. <hi rend='italic'>Od.</hi> i. 1. i.
</p>
<p>
The goal shunn'd by the burning wheels.
</p>
<p>
&mdash;Trans.</p></note> of the wheels was very
rapid, and it was requisite to graze against the boundary in
turning, the least error in driving would have broken the
chariot in pieces, and might have dangerously wounded the
charioteer. An example of which we find in the <hi rend='italic'>Electra</hi> of
Sophocles, who gives an admirable description of a chariot-race
run by ten competitors. The pretended Orestes, at the
twelfth and last round, which was to decide the victory, having
only one antagonist, the rest having been thrown out, was so
unfortunate as to break one of his wheels against the boundary,
and falling out of his seat entangled in the reins, the horses
dragged him violently forwards along with them, and tore him
to pieces. But this very seldom happened. To avoid such
danger, Nestor gave the following directions to his son Antilochus,
who was going to dispute the prize in the chariot-race.<note place='foot'>Hom.
<hi rend='italic'>Il.</hi> l. xxiii. v. 334, &amp;c.</note>
<q>My son,</q> says he, <q>drive your horses as near as possible to
the boundary; for which reason, always inclining your body
over your chariot, get the left of your competitors, and encouraging
the horse on the right, give him the rein, whilst the
near horse, hard held, turns the boundary so close that the
nave of the wheel seems to graze upon it; but have a care of
running against the stone, lest you wound your horses, and
dash the chariot in pieces.</q>
</p>

<p>
Father Montfaucon mentions a difficulty, in his opinion of
much consequence, in regard to the places of those who contended
for the prize in the chariot-race. They all started
indeed from the same line, and at the same time, and so far
<pb n='lxvii'/><anchor id='Pglxvii'/>
had no advantage of each other; but he, whose lot gave him
the first place, being nearest the boundary at the end of the
career, and having but a small compass to describe in turning
about it, had less way to make than the second, third, fourth,
&amp;c. especially when the chariots were drawn by four horses,
which took up a greater space between the first and the others,
and obliged them to make a larger circle in coming round.
This advantage twelve times together, as must happen, admitting
the Stadium was to be run round twelve times, gave such
a superiority to the first, as seemed to assure him infallibly of
the victory against all his competitors. To me it seems, that
the fleetness of the horses, joined with the address of the driver,
might countervail this odds; either by getting before the first,
or by taking his place; if not in the first, at least in some of
the subsequent rounds; for it is not to be supposed, that in the
progress of the race the antagonists always continued in the
same order in which they started. They often changed places
in a short interval of time, and in that variety and vicissitude
consisted all the diversion of the spectators.
</p>

<p>
It was not required, that those who aspired to the victory
should enter the lists, and drive their chariots in person. Their
being spectators of the games, or even sending their horses
thither, was sufficient; but in either case, it was previously
necessary to register the names of the persons for whom the
horses were to run, either in the chariot or single horse-races.
</p>

<p>
At the time that the city of Potidæa surrendered to Philip,
three couriers brought him advices; the first, that the Illyrians
had been defeated in a great battle by his general Parmenio;
the second, that he had carried the prize of the horse-race in
the Olympic games; and the third, that the queen was delivered
of a son. Plutarch seems to insinuate, that Philip was equally
delighted with each of these circumstances.<note place='foot'>Plut.
<hi rend='italic'>in Alex.</hi> p. 666.</note>
</p>

<p>
Hiero sent horses to Olympia, to run for the prize, and
caused a magnificent pavilion to be erected for them.<note place='foot'>Ibid.
<hi rend='italic'>in Themist.</hi> p. 124.</note> Upon
this occasion Themistocles harangued the Greeks, to persuade
them to pull down the tyrant's pavilion, who had refused his
aid against the common enemy, and to hinder his horses from
running with the rest. It does not appear that any regard was
had to this remonstrance; for we find, by one of Pindar's odes,
composed in honour of Hiero, that he won the prize in the
equestrian races.
</p>

<p>
No one ever carried the ambition of making a great figure
<pb n='lxviii'/><anchor id='Pglxviii'/>
in the public games of Greece so far as Alcibiades,<note place='foot'>Ibid.
<hi rend='italic'>in Alcib.</hi> p. 196.</note> in which he
distinguished himself in the most splendid manner, by the
great number of horses and chariots which he kept only for
the races. There never was either private person or king that
sent, as he did, seven chariots at once to the Olympic games,
wherein he carried the first, second, and third prizes; an
honour no one ever had before him. The famous poet
Euripides celebrated these victories in an ode, of which Plutarch
has preserved a fragment. The victor, after having
made a sumptuous sacrifice to Jupiter, gave a magnificent
feast to the innumerable multitude of spectators at the games.
It is not easy to comprehend, how the wealth of a private person
should suffice for so enormous an expense: but Antisthenes,
the scholar of Socrates, who relates what he saw, informs
us, that many cities of the allies, in emulation of each
other, supplied Alcibiades with all things necessary for the
support of such incredible magnificence; equipages, horses,
tents, sacrifices, the most exquisite provisions, the most delicate
wines; in a word, all that was necessary to the support of his
table or train. The passage is remarkable; for the same
author assures us, that this was not only done when Alcibiades
went to the Olympic games, but in all his military expeditions
and journeys by land or sea. <q>Wherever,</q> says he, <q>Alcibiades
travelled, he made use of four of the allied cities as his servants.
Ephesus furnished him with tents, as magnificent as
those of the Persians; Chios took care to provide for his horses;
Cyzicum supplied him with sacrifices, and provisions for his
table; and Lesbos gave him wine, with whatever else was requisite
for his house.</q>
</p>

<p>
I must not omit, in speaking of the Olympic games, that the
ladies were admitted to dispute the prize in them as well as the
men; and that many of them obtained it. Cynisca, sister of
Agesilaus, king of Sparta, first opened this new path of glory
to her sex, and was proclaimed conqueror in the race of chariots
with four horses.<note place='foot'>Pausan. l. iii. p. 172.</note>
This victory, of which till then there had
been no example, did not fail of being celebrated with all
possible splendour.<note place='foot'>Ibid. p. 188.</note>
A magnificent monument was erected at Sparta in honour of
Cynisca;<note place='foot'>Ibid. p. 172.</note> and the Lacedæmonians,
though otherwise very little sensible to the charms of poetry,
appointed a poet to transmit this new triumph to posterity, and
to immortalize its memory by an inscription in verse. She
herself dedicated a chariot of brass, drawn by four horses, in
<pb n='lxix'/><anchor id='Pglxix'/>
the temple of Delphi;<note place='foot'>Ibid. l. v. p. 309.</note>
in which the charioteer was also represented;
a certain proof that she did not drive it herself. In
process of time, the picture of Cynisca, drawn by the famous
Apelles, was annexed to it, and the whole adorned with many
inscriptions in honour of that Spartan heroine.<note place='foot'>Pausan.
l. vi. p. 344.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<head>Of the honours and rewards granted to the victors.</head>

<p>
These honours and rewards were of several kinds. The
acclamations of the spectators in honour of the victors were
only a prelude to the prizes designed them. These prizes
were different wreaths of wild olive, pine, parsley, or laurel,
according to the different places where the games were celebrated.
Those crowns were always attended with branches of
palm, that the victors carried in their right hands; which
custom, according to Plutarch,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Sympos.</hi>
l. viii. <hi rend='italic'>quæst.</hi> 4.</note> arose (perhaps) from a property
of the palm-tree, which displays new vigour the more
endeavours are used to crush or bend it, and is a symbol of the
courage and resistance of the champion who had obtained the
prize. As he might be victor more than once in the same
games, and sometimes on the same day, he might also receive
several crowns and palms.
</p>

<p>
When the victor had received the crown and palm, a herald,
preceded by a trumpet, conducted him through the Stadium,
and proclaimed aloud the name and country of the successful
champion, who passed in that kind of review before the people,
whilst they redoubled their acclamations and applauses at the
sight of him.
</p>

<p>
When he returned to his own country, the people came out
in a body to meet him, and conducted him into the city,
adorned with all the marks of his victory, and riding upon a
chariot drawn by four horses. He made his entry not through
the gates, but through a breach purposely made in the walls.
Lighted torches were carried before him, and a numerous train
followed to do honour to the procession.
</p>

<p>
The athletic triumph almost always concluded with feasts
made for the victors, their relations, and friends, either at the
expense of the public, or by private individuals, who regaled
not only their families and friends, but often a great part of
the spectators. Alcibiades,<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>in
Alcib.</hi> p. 196.</note> after having sacrificed to the
Olympian Jupiter, which was always the first care of the victor,
treated the whole assembly. Leophron did the same, as Athenæus
<pb n='lxx'/><anchor id='Pglxx'/>
reports;<note place='foot'>Lib. i. p. 3.</note> who adds, that Empedocles of Agrigentum,
having conquered in the same games, and not having it in his
power, being a Pythagorean, to regale the people with flesh or
fish, caused an ox to be made of a paste, composed of myrrh,
incense, and all sorts of spices, of which pieces were given to
all who were present.
</p>

<p>
One of the most honourable privileges granted to the Athletic
victors, was the right of precedency at the public games. At
Sparta it was a custom for the king to take them with him in
military expeditions, to fight near his person, and to be his
guard; which, with reason, was judged very honourable. Another
privilege, in which advantage was united with honour,
was that of being maintained for the rest of their lives at the
expense of their country. That this expense might not
become too chargeable to the state, Solon<note place='foot'>Diog.
Laërt. <hi rend='italic'>in Solon</hi>, p. 37.</note> reduced the pension
of a victor in the Olympic games to five hundred drachmas;<note place='foot'>About
11<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi></note> in the Isthmian
to a hundred;<note place='foot'>About 2<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi></note> and in the
rest in proportion. The victor and his country considered this pension, less as a
relief of the champion's indigence, than as a mark of honour
and distinction. They were also exempted from all civil
offices and employments.
</p>

<p>
The celebration of the games being over, one of the first
cares of the magistrates, who presided in them, was to inscribe,
in the public register, the name and country of the Athletæ
who had carried the prizes, and to annex the species of combat
in which they had been victorious. The chariot-race had the
preference to all other games. Hence the historians, who
date occurrences by the Olympiads, as Thucydides, Dionysius
of Halicarnassus, Diodorus Siculus, and Pausanias, almost
always express the Olympiad by the name and country of the
victors in that race.
</p>

<p>
The praises of the victorious Athletæ were amongst the
Greeks one of the principal subjects of their lyric poetry. We
find, that all the odes of the four books of Pindar turn upon it,
each of which takes its title from the games in which the combatants
signalized themselves, whose victories those poems
celebrate. The poet, indeed, frequently enriches his matter,
by calling in to the champion's assistance, incapable alone of
inspiring all the enthusiasm necessary, the aid of the gods,
heroes, and princes, who have any relation to his subject; and
to support the flights of imagination, to which he abandons
himself. Before Pindar, the poet Simonides practised the
<pb n='lxxi'/><anchor id='Pglxxi'/>
same manner of writing, intermingling the praises of the gods
and heroes with those of the champions, whose victories he
sang. It is related upon this head,<note place='foot'>Cic.
<hi rend='italic'>de Orat.</hi> l. ii. n. 352, 353. Phæd. l.
ii. <hi rend='italic'>fab.</hi> 24. Quintil. l. xi. c 2.</note>
that one of the victors in
boxing, called Scopas, having agreed with Simonides for a
poem upon his victory, the poet, according to custom, after
having given the highest praises to the champion, expatiated in
a long digression to the honour of Castor and Pollux. Scopas,
satisfied in appearance with the performance of Simonides,
paid him however only the third part of the sum agreed on,
referring him for the remainder to the Tyndaridæ, whom he
had celebrated so well. And in fact he was well paid by them,
if we may believe the sequel; for, at the feast given by the
champion, whilst the guests were at table, a servant came to
Simonides, and told him, that two men, covered with dust and
sweat, were at the door, and desired to speak with him in all
haste. He had scarce set his foot out of the chamber, in order
to go to them, when the roof fell in, and crushed the champion,
with all his guests, to death.
</p>

<p>
Sculpture united with poetry to perpetuate the fame of the
champions. Statues were erected to the victors, especially in
the Olympic games, in the very place where they had been
crowned, and sometimes in that of their birth also; which was
commonly done at the expense of their country. Amongst
the statues which adorned Olympia, were those of several children
of ten or twelve years old, who had obtained the prize at
that age in the Olympic games. They did not only raise
such monuments to the champions, but to the very horses, to
whose swiftness they were indebted for the Agonistic crown:
and Pausanias<note place='foot'>Lib. vi. p. 368.</note>
mentions one, which was erected in honour of
a mare, called Aura, whose history is worth repeating. Phidolas
her rider, having fallen off in the beginning of the race,
the mare continued to run in the same manner as if he had
been upon her back. She outstripped all the rest; and upon
the sound of the trumpets, which was usual toward the end of
the race to animate the competitors, she redoubled her vigour
and courage, turned round the goal; and, as if she had been
sensible that she had gained the victory, presented herself
before the judges of the games. The Eleans declared Phidolas
victor, with permission to erect a monument to himself and the
mare, that had served him so well.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='lxxii'/><anchor id='Pglxxii'/>

<div>
<head>The different Taste of the Greeks and Romans, in regard to
Public Shows.</head>

<p>
Before I make an end of these remarks upon the combats
and games so much in estimation amongst the Greeks, I beg
the reader's permission to make a reflection, that may serve to
explain the difference of character between the Greeks and
Romans, with regard to this subject.
</p>

<p>
The most common entertainment of the latter, at which the
fair sex, by nature tender and compassionate, were present in
throngs, was the combat of the gladiators, and of men with
bears and lions; in which the cries of the wounded and dying,
and the abundant effusion of human blood, supplied a grateful
spectacle for a whole people, who feasted their cruel eyes with
the savage pleasure of seeing men murder one another in cool
blood; and in the times of the persecutions, with the tearing
in pieces of old men and infants, of women and tender virgins,
whose age and weakness are apt to excite compassion in the
hardest hearts.
</p>

<p>
In Greece these combats were absolutely unknown, and
were only introduced into some cities, after their subjection to
the Roman people. The Athenians, however, whose distinguishing
characteristics were benevolence and humanity, never
admitted them into their city;<note place='foot'>Lucian. <hi rend='italic'>in
vit. Demonact.</hi> p. 1014.</note> and when it was proposed to
introduce the combats of the gladiators, that they might not be
outdone by the Corinthians in that point, <q>First throw down,</q>
cried out an Athenian<note place='foot'>It was Demonax, a
celebrated philosopher, whose disciple Lucian had been.
He flourished in the reign of Marcus Aurelius.&mdash;Trans.</note>
from the midst of the assembly, <q>throw
down the altar, erected above a thousand years ago by our
ancestors to Mercy.</q>
</p>

<p>
It must be allowed that in this respect the conduct and
wisdom of the Greeks were infinitely superior to that of the
Romans. I speak of the wisdom of Pagans. Convinced that
the multitude, too much governed by the objects of sense to be
sufficiently amused and entertained with the pleasures of the
understanding, could be delighted only with sensible objects,
both nations were studious to divert them with games and
shows, and such external contrivances, as were proper to affect
the senses; in the institution of which, each evinced and followed
its peculiar inclination and disposition.
</p>

<p>
The Romans, educated in war, and accustomed to battles,
always retained, notwithstanding the politeness upon which
<pb n='lxxiii'/><anchor id='Pglxxiii'/>
they piqued themselves, something of their ancient ferocity;
and hence it was, that the effusion of blood, and the murders
exhibited in their public shows, far from inspiring them with
horror, formed a grateful entertainment to them.
</p>

<p>
The insolent pomp of triumphs flowed from the same source,
and argued no less inhumanity. To obtain this honour, it was
necessary to prove, that eight or ten thousand men had been
killed in battle. The spoils, which were carried with so much
ostentation, proclaimed, that an infinity of worthy families had
been reduced to the utmost misery. The innumerable troop
of captives had been free persons a few days before, and were
often distinguishable for honour, merit, and virtue. The representation
of the towns that had been taken in the war, explained
that they had sacked, plundered, and burnt the most opulent
cities; and had either destroyed or enslaved their inhabitants.
In short, nothing was more inhuman, than to drag kings and
princes in chains before the chariot of a Roman citizen, and to
insult their misfortunes and humiliation in that public manner.
</p>

<p>
The triumphal arches, erected under the emperors, where
the enemies appeared with chains upon their hands and legs,
could proceed only from a haughty fierceness of disposition,
and an inhuman pride, that took delight in immortalizing the
shame and sorrow of subjected nations.
</p>

<p>
The joy of the Greeks after a victory was far more modest.<note place='foot'>Plut.
<hi rend='italic'>in Quæst. Rom.</hi> p. 273.</note>
They erected trophies indeed, but of wood, a substance of no
long duration, which time would soon consume; and these it
was prohibited to renew. Plutarch's reason for this is admirable.<note place='foot'>Ὅτι
τοῦ χρόνου τἀ σεμεῖα τῆς πρὸς τοὺς πολεμίους διαφορᾶς ἀμαυροῦντος, αὐτοὺς
ἀν λαμβάνειν καὶ καινοποιεῖν ἐπιφθονόν ἐστι καὶ φιλαπεχθῆμον.&mdash;Trans.</note>
After time had destroyed and obliterated the marks of
dissension and enmity that had divided nations, it would have
been the excess of odious and barbarous animosity, to have
thought of reestablishing them, to perpetuate the remembrance
of ancient quarrels, which could not be buried too soon in
silence and oblivion. He adds, that the trophies of stone and
brass, since substituted to those of wood, reflect no honour
upon those who introduced the custom.
</p>

<p>
I am pleased with the grief depicted on Agesilaus's countenance,<note place='foot'>Plut.
<hi rend='italic'>in Lacon. Apophthegm</hi>. p. 211.</note>
after a considerable victory, wherein a great number
of his enemies, that is to say, of Greeks, were left upon the
field, and to hear him utter with sighs and groans, these words,
so full of moderation and humanity: <q>Oh unhappy Greece,
to deprive thyself of so many brave citizens, and to destroy
<pb n='lxxiv'/><anchor id='Pglxxiv'/>
those who had been sufficient to have conquered all the Barbarians!</q>
</p>

<p>
The same spirit of moderation and humanity prevailed in
the public shows of the Greeks. Their festivals had nothing
mournful or afflictive in them. Every thing in those feasts
tended to delight, friendship, and harmony: and in that consisted
one of the greatest advantages which resulted to Greece,
from the solemnization of these games. The republics, separated
by distance of country, and diversity of interests, having
the opportunity of meeting from time to time, in the same
place, and in the midst of rejoicing and festivity, allied themselves
more strictly with one another, stimulated each other
against the Barbarians and the common enemies of their
liberty, and made up their differences by the mediation of
some neutral state in alliance with them. The same language,
manners, sacrifices, exercises, and worship, all conspired to
unite the several little states of Greece into one great and formidable
nation; and to preserve amongst them the same disposition,
the same principles, the same zeal for their liberty, and
the same fondness for the arts and sciences.
</p>

<div>
<head>Of the Prizes of Wit, and the Shows and Representations of
the Theatre.</head>

<p>
I have reserved for the conclusion of this head another kind
of competition, which does not at all depend upon the strength,
activity, and address of the body, and may be called with
reason the combat of the mind; wherein the orators, historians,
and poets, made trial of their capacities, and submitted their
productions to the censure and judgment of the public. The
emulation in this sort of dispute was so much the more lively
and ardent, as the victory in question might justly be deemed
to be infinitely superior to all others, because it affects the man
more nearly, is founded on his personal and internal qualities,
and decides upon the merit of his intellectual capacity; which
are advantages we are apt to aspire after with the utmost
vivacity and passion, and of which we are least of all inclined
to renounce the glory to others.
</p>

<p>
It was a great honour, and at the same time a most sensible
pleasure, for writers, who are generally fond of fame and applause,
to have known how to unite in their favour the suffrages
of so numerous and select an assembly as that of the Olympic
games; in which were present all the finest geniuses of
Greece, and all who were most capable of judging of the excellency
<pb n='lxxv'/><anchor id='Pglxxv'/>
of a work. This theatre was equally open to history,
eloquence, and poetry.
</p>

<p>
Herodotus read his history<note place='foot'>Lucian. <hi rend='italic'>in
Herod.</hi> p. 622.</note> at the Olympic games to all
Greece, assembled at them, and was heard with such applause,
that the names of the nine Muses were given to the nine books
which compose his work, and the people cried out wherever he
passed, <q>That is he, who has written our history, and celebrated
our glorious successes against the Barbarians so excellently.</q>
</p>

<p>
All who had been present at the games, caused afterwards
every part of Greece to resound with the name and glory of
this illustrious historian.
</p>

<p>
Lucian, who writes the fact which I have related, adds, that
after the example of Herodotus, many of the sophists and rhetoricians
went to Olympia, to read the harangues of their composing;
finding that the shortest and most certain method of
acquiring a great reputation in a little time.
</p>

<p>
Plutarch observes,<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>de vit Orat.</hi>
p. 836.</note> that Lysias, the famous Athenian orator,
contemporary with Herodotus, pronounced a speech in the
Olympic games, wherein he congratulated the Greeks upon
their reconciliation with each other, and their having united to
reduce the power of Dionysius the Tyrant, as upon the greatest
action they had ever done.
</p>

<p>
We may judge of the eagerness of the poets to signalize
themselves in these solemn games, from that of Dionysius
himself.<note place='foot'>Diod. l. xiv. p. 318.</note>
That prince, who had the foolish vanity to believe
himself the most excellent poet of his time, appointed readers,
called in Greek, ῥαψωδοὶ (<hi rend='italic'>Rhapsodists</hi>,) to read several pieces
of his composing at Olympia. When they began to pronounce
the verses of the royal poet, the strong and harmonious voices
of the readers occasioned a profound silence, and they were
heard at first with the greatest attention, which continually
decreased as they went on, and turned at last into downright
horse-laughs and hooting; so miserable did the verses appear.
He comforted himself for this disgrace by a victory he gained
some time after in the feast of Bacchus at Athens, in which he
caused a tragedy of his composition to be represented.<note place='foot'>Ibid.
l. xv. p. 384.</note>
</p>

<p>
The disputes of the poets in the Olympic games were
nothing, in comparison with the ardour and emulation that
prevailed at Athens; which is what remains to be said upon
this subject, and therefore I shall conclude with it: taking
occasion to give my readers, at the same time, a short view of
the shows and representations of the theatre of the ancients.
</p>

<pb n='lxxvi'/><anchor id='Pglxxvi'/>

<p>
Those who would be more fully informed on this subject, will
find it treated at large in a work lately made public by the
reverend father Brumoi the Jesuit; a work which abounds with
profound knowledge and erudition, and with reflections entirely
new, deduced from the nature of the poems of which it treats.
I shall make considerable use of that piece, and often without
citing it; which is not uncommon with me.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Extraordinary Fondness of the Athenians for the Entertainments
of the Stage. Emulation of the Poets in disputing
the Prizes in those Representations. A short Idea of Dramatic
Poetry.</head>

<p>
No people ever expressed so much ardour and eagerness for
the entertainments of the theatre as the Greeks, and especially
the Athenians. The reason is obvious: as no people ever
demonstrated such extent of genius, nor carried so far the love
of eloquence and poesy, taste for the sciences, justness of sentiments,
elegance of ear, and delicacy in all the refinements of
language. A poor woman, who sold herbs at Athens, discovered
Theophrastus to be a stranger, by a single word which he
affectedly made use of in expressing himself.<note place='foot'>Attica anus
Theophrastum, hominem alioqui disertissimum, annotatâ unius
affectatione verbi, hospitem dixit. Quint. l. viii. c. 1.&mdash;Trans.</note>
The common people got the tragedies of Euripides by heart. The genius of
every nation expresses itself in the people's manner of passing
their time, and in their pleasures. The great employment and
delight of the Athenians were to amuse themselves with works
of wit, and to judge of the dramatic pieces, that were acted by
public authority several times a year, especially at the feasts of
Bacchus, when the tragic and comic poets disputed for the
prize. The former used to present four of their pieces at a
time; except Sophocles, who did not think fit to continue so
laborious an exercise, and confined himself to one performance,
when he disputed the prize.
</p>

<p>
The state appointed judges, to determine upon the merit of
the tragic or comic pieces, before they were represented in the
festivals. They were acted before them in the presence of the
people; but undoubtedly with no great preparation. The
judges gave their suffrages, and that performance, which had
the most voices, was declared victorious, received the crown as
such, and was represented with all possible pomp at the expense
of the republic. This did not, however, exclude such pieces,
as were only in the second or third class. The best had not
<pb n='lxxvii'/><anchor id='Pglxxvii'/>
always the preference; for what times have been exempt from
party, caprice, ignorance, and prejudice? Ælian<note place='foot'>Ælian,
l ii. c. 8.</note> is very
angry with the judges, who, in one of these disputes, gave only
the second place to Euripides. He accuses them of judging
either without capacity, or of suffering themselves to be bribed.
It is easy to conceive the warmth and emulation, which these
disputes and public rewards excited amongst the poets, and
how much they contributed to the perfection, to which Greece
carried dramatic performances.
</p>

<p>
The dramatic poem introduces the persons themselves, speaking
and acting upon the stage: in the epic, on the contrary,
the poet only relates the different adventures of his characters.
It is natural to be delighted with fine descriptions of events, in
which illustrious persons and whole nations are interested;
and hence the epic poem had its origin. But we are quite
differently affected with hearing those persons themselves, with
being the confidents of their most secret sentiments, and auditors
and spectators of their resolutions, enterprises, and the
happy or unhappy events attending them. To read and see
an action, are quite different things; we are infinitely more
moved with what is acted, than with what we merely read.
Our eyes as well as our minds are addressed at the same time.
The spectator, agreeably deceived by an imitation so nearly
approaching life, mistakes the picture for the original, and
thinks the object real. This gave birth to dramatic poetry,
which includes tragedy and comedy.
</p>

<p>
To these may be added the satiric poem, which derives its
name from the satyrs, rural gods, who were always the chief
characters in it; and not from the <q>satire,</q> a kind of abusive
poetry, which has no resemblance to this, and is of a much later
date. The satiric poem was neither tragedy nor comedy, but
something between both, participating of the character of each.
The poets, who disputed the prize, generally added one of
these pieces to their tragedies, to allay the gravity and solemnity
of the one, with the mirth and pleasantry of the other.
There is but one example of this ancient poem come down to
us, which is the <hi rend='italic'>Cyclops</hi> of Euripides.
</p>

<p>
I shall confine myself upon this head to tragedy and comedy;
both which had their origin amongst the Greeks, who looked
upon them as fruits of their own growth, of which they could
never have enough. Athens was remarkable for an extraordinary
appetite of this kind. These two poems, which were for
a long time comprised under the general name of tragedy,
<pb n='lxxviii'/><anchor id='Pglxxviii'/>
received there by degrees such improvements, as at length raised
them to their highest perfection.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Origin and Progress of Tragedy. Poets who excelled in
it at Athens; Æschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides.</head>

<p>
There had been many tragic and comic poets before Thespis;
but as they had made no alterations in the original rude form
of this poem, and as Thespis was the first that made any improvement
in it, he was generally esteemed its inventor. Before
him, tragedy was no more than a jumble of buffoon tales in
the comic style, intermixed with the singing of a chorus in praise
of Bacchus; for it is to the feasts of that god, celebrated at
the time of the vintage, that tragedy owes its birth.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>La tragédie, informe et grossière en na'ssant,</l>
<l>N'étoit qu'un simple chœur, où chacun en dansant,</l>
<l>Et du dieu des raisins entonnant les louanges,</l>
<l>S'éfforçoit d'attirer de fertiles vendanges.</l>
<l>Là, le vin et la joie éveillant les esprits,</l>
<l>Du plus habile chantre un bouc étoit le prix.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Formless and gross did tragedy arise,</l>
<l>A simple chorus, rather mad than wise;</l>
<l>For fruitful vintages the dancing throng</l>
<l>Roar'd to the god of grapes a drunken song:</l>
<l>Wild mirth and wine sustain'd the frantic note,</l>
<l>And the best singer had the prize, a goat.<note place='foot'>Boileau,
<hi rend='italic'>Art. Poët.</hi> chant. iii.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Thespis made several alterations in it, which Horace describes
after Aristotle, in his <hi rend='italic'>Art of Poetry</hi>. The
first<note place='foot'><p>Ignotum tragicæ genus invenisse camœnæ<lb/>
Dicitur, et plaustris vexisse poëmata Thespis,<lb/>
Quæ canerent agerentque peruncti fæcibus ora.
</p>
<p>
Hor. <hi rend='italic'>de Art. Poët.</hi>
</p>
<p>
When Thespis first expos'd the tragic Muse,<lb/>
Rude were the actors, and a cart the scene,<lb/>
Where ghastly faces, smear'd with lees of wine,<lb/>
Frighted the children, and amus'd the crowd.
</p>
<p>
Roscom. <hi rend='italic'>Art of Poet.</hi>
</p>
<p>
&mdash;Trans.</p></note> was to carry
his actors about in a cart, whereas before they used to sing in
the streets, wherever chance led them. Another was to have
their faces smeared over with wine-lees, instead of acting
without disguise, as at first. He also introduced a character
among the chorus, who, to give the actors time to rest themselves
and to take breath, repeated the adventures of some
illustrious person; which recital, at length, gave place to the
subjects of tragedy.
</p>

<pb n='lxxix'/><anchor id='Pglxxix'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Thespis fut le premier, qui barbouillé de lie,</l>
<l>Promena par les bourgs cette heureuse folie,</l>
<l>Et d'acteurs mal oinés chargeant un tombereau,</l>
<l>Amusa les passans d'un spectacle nouveau.<note place='foot'>Boileau,
<hi rend='italic'>Art. Poet.</hi> chant. iii.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>First Thespis, smear'd with lees, and void of art,</l>
<l>The grateful folly vented from a cart;</l>
<l>And as his tawdry actors drove about,</l>
<l>The sight was new, and charm'd the gaping rout.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3440. Ant. J.C. 564.</note>
Thespis lived in the time of Solon.<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>in
Solon</hi> p. 95.</note> That wise legislator,
upon seeing his pieces performed, expressed his
dislike, by striking his staff against the ground; apprehending
that these poetical fictions and idle stories,
from mere theatrical representations, would soon become matters
of importance, and have too great a share in all public and
private affairs.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3464. Ant. J.C. 540.</note>
It is not so easy to invent, as to improve the inventions of
others. The alterations Thespis made in tragedy,
gave room for Æschylus to make new and more considerable
of his own. He was born at Athens, in
the first year of the sixtieth Olympiad. He took upon him
the profession of arms, at a time when the Athenians reckoned
almost as many heroes as citizens. He was at the battles of
Marathon, Salamis, and Platæa, where he did his duty.
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3514. Ant. J.C. 490.</note>
But his disposition called him elsewhere, and put him
upon entering into another course, where no less
glory was to be acquired; and where he was soon
without any competitors. As a superior genius, he took upon
him to reform, or rather to create tragedy anew; of which he
has, in consequence, been always acknowledged the inventor
and father. Father Brumoi, in a dissertation which abounds
with wit and good sense, explains the manner in which
Æschylus conceived the true idea of tragedy from Homer's
epic poems. The poet himself used to say, that his works
were the remnants of the feasts given by Homer in the <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Tragedy therefore took a new form under him. He gave
masks<note place='foot'><p>Post hunc personæ pallæque repertor honestæ<lb/>
Æschylus, et modicis instravit pulpita tignis,<lb/>
Et docuit magnumque loqui, nitique cothurno.
</p>
<p>
Hor. <hi rend='italic'>de Art. Poët.</hi>
</p>
<p>
This, Æschylus (with indignation) saw,<lb/>
And built a stage, found out a decent dress,<lb/>
Brought vizards in (a civiler disguise),<lb/>
And taught men how to speak and how to act.
</p>
<p>
Roscom. <hi rend='italic'>Art of Poet.</hi>&mdash;Trans.</p></note>
to his actors, adorned them with robes and trains, and
<pb n='lxxx'/><anchor id='Pglxxx'/>
made them wear buskins. Instead of a cart, he erected a
theatre of a moderate elevation, and entirely changed their
style; which from being merry and burlesque, as at first, became
majestic and serious.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Eschyle dans le chœur jetta les personages:</l>
<l>D'un masque plus honnête habilla les visages:</l>
<l>Sur les ais d'un théâtre en public exhaussé</l>
<l>Fit paroître l'acteur d'un brodequin chaussé.<note place='foot'>Boileau,
<hi rend='italic'>Art. Poet.</hi></note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>From Æschylus the chorus learnt new grace:</l>
<l>He veil'd with decent masks the actor's face,</l>
<l>Taught him in buskins first to tread the stage,</l>
<l>And rais'd a theatre to please the age.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
But that was only the external part or body of tragedy. Its
soul, which was the most important and essential addition of
Æschylus, consisted in the vivacity and spirit of the action,
sustained by the dialogue of the persons of the drama introduced
by him; in the artful working up of the stronger passions,
especially of terror and pity, which, by alternately afflicting
and agitating the soul with mournful or terrible objects,
produce a grateful pleasure and delight from that very trouble
and emotion; in the choice of a subject, great, noble, interesting,
and contained within due bounds by the unity of time,
place, and action: in short, it is the conduct and disposition
of the whole piece, which, by the order and harmony of its
parts, and the happy connection of its incidents and intrigues,
holds the mind of the spectator in suspense till the catastrophe,
and then restores him his tranquillity, and dismisses him with
satisfaction.
</p>

<p>
The chorus had been established before Æschylus, as it
composed alone, or next to alone, what was then called tragedy.
He did not therefore exclude it, but, on the contrary, thought
fit to incorporate it, to sing as chorus between the acts. Thus
it supplied the interval of resting, and was a kind of person of
the drama, employed either<note place='foot'><p>Actoris
partes chorus officiumque virile<lb/>
Defendat, neu quid medios intercinat actus,<lb/>
Quod non proposito conducat, et hæreat apté.<lb/>
Ille bonis faveatque, et concilietur amicis,<lb/>
Et regat iratos, et amet peccare timentes.<lb/>
Ille dapes laudet mensæ brevis; ille salubrem<lb/>
Justitiam, legesque, et apertis otia portis.<lb/>
Ille tegat commissa, deosque precetur et oret,<lb/>
Ut redeat miseris, abeat fortuna superbis.<lb/>
</p>
<p>
Hor. <hi rend='italic'>de Art. Poët.</hi>
</p>
<p>
The chorus should supply what action wants,<lb/>
And hath a generous and manly part;
Bridles wild rage, loves rigid honesty,<lb/>
And strict observance of impartial laws,<lb/>
Sobriety, security, and peace,<lb/>
And begs the gods to turn blind Fortune's wheel,<lb/>
To raise the wretched, and pull down the proud;<lb/>
But nothing must be sung between the acts,<lb/>
But what someway conduces to the plot.
</p>
<p>
Roscom. <hi rend='italic'>Art of Poet</hi>. translat.&mdash;Trans.</p></note>
in giving useful advice and salutary
<pb n='lxxxi'/><anchor id='Pglxxxi'/>
instructions, in espousing the party of innocence and
virtue, in being the depository of secrets, and the avenger of
violated religion, or in sustaining all those characters at the
same time according to Horace. The coryphæus, or principal
person of the chorus, spoke for the rest.
</p>

<p>
In one of Æschylus's pieces, called the <hi rend='italic'>Eumenides</hi>, the
poet represents Orestes at the bottom of the stage, surrounded
by the Furies, laid asleep by Apollo. Their figure must have
been extremely horrible, as it is related, that upon their waking
and appearing tumultuously on the theatre, where they were to
act as a chorus, some women miscarried with the surprise, and
several children died of the fright. The chorus at that time
consisted of fifty actors. After this accident, it was reduced
to fifteen by an express law, and at length to twelve.
</p>

<p>
I have observed, that one of the alterations made by Æschylus
in tragedy, was the mask worn by his actors. These dramatic
masks had no resemblance to ours, which only cover the
face, but were a kind of case for the whole head, and which,
besides the features, represented the beard, the hair, the ears,
and even the ornaments used by women in their head-dresses.
These masks varied according to the different pieces that were
acted. The subject is treated at large in a dissertation of M.
Boindin's, inserted in the <hi rend='italic'>Memoirs of the Academy of Belles
Lettres</hi>.<note place='foot'>Vol. iv.</note>
</p>

<p>
I could never comprehend, as I have observed
elsewhere,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Manner of Teaching</hi>,
&amp;c. vol. iv.</note> in
speaking of pronunciation, how masks came to continue so long
upon the stage of the ancients; for certainly they could not
be used, without considerably deadening the spirit of the
action, which is principally expressed in the countenance, the
seat and mirror of what passes in the soul. Does it not often
happen, that the blood, according as it is put in motion by
different passions, sometimes covers the face with a sudden
and modest blush, sometimes enflames it with the heat of rage
and fury, sometimes retires, leaving it pale with fear, and at
others diffuses a calm and amiable serenity over it? All these
affections are strongly imaged and distinguished in the lineaments
of the face. The mask deprives the features of this
<pb n='lxxxii'/><anchor id='Pglxxxii'/>
energetic language, and of that life and soul, by which it is the
faithful interpreter of all the sentiments of the heart. I do not
wonder, therefore, at Cicero's remark upon the action of
Roscius.<note place='foot'>Quo meliùs nostri illi senes, qui personatum,
ne Roscium quidem, magnoperé laudabant. Lib. iii. <hi rend='italic'>de
Orat.</hi> n. 221.&mdash;Trans.</note> <q>Our ancestors,</q>' says he, <q>were
better judges than we are. They could not wholly approve even Roscius himself,
whilst he performed in a mask.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3509. Ant. J.C. 495.</note>
Æschylus was in the sole possession of the glory of the
stage, with almost every voice in his favour, when a young
rival made his appearance to dispute the palm with him. This
was Sophocles. He was born at Colonos, a town in
Attica, in the second year of the seventy-first Olympiad.
His father was a blacksmith, or one who kept
people of that trade to work for him. His first essay was a
masterpiece.
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3534. Ant. J.C. 470.</note>
When, upon the occasion of Cimon's having
found the bones of Theseus, and their being brought to Athens,
a dispute between the tragic poets was appointed,
Sophocles entered the lists with Æschylus, and
carried the prize against him. The ancient victor,
laden till then with the wreaths he had acquired, believed
them all lost by failing of the last, and withdrew in disgust into
Sicily to king Hiero, the protector and patron of all the learned
in disgrace at Athens. He died there soon after in a very
singular manner, if we may believe Suidas. As he lay asleep
in the fields, with his head bare, an eagle, taking his bald
crown for a stone, let a tortoise fall upon it, which killed him.
Of ninety, or at least seventy, tragedies, composed by him,
only seven are now extant.
</p>

<p>
Nor have those of Sophocles escaped the injury of time
better, though one hundred and seventeen in number, and according
to some one hundred and thirty. He retained to
extreme old age all the force and vigour of his genius, as appears
from a circumstance in his history. His children,
unworthy of so great a father, upon pretence that he had lost
his senses, summoned him before the judges, in order to obtain
a decree, that his estate might be taken from him, and put into
their hands. He made no other defence, than to read a tragedy
he was at that time composing, called <hi rend='italic'>Œdipus at Colonos</hi>,
with which the judges were so charmed, that he carried his
cause unanimously; and his children, detested by the whole
assembly, got nothing by their suit, but the shame and infamy
due to so flagrant ingratitude. He was twenty times crowned
victor. Some say he expired in repeating his <hi rend='italic'>Antigone</hi>, for
<pb n='lxxxiii'/><anchor id='Pglxxxiii'/>
want of power to recover his breath, after a violent endeavour
to pronounce a long period to the end; others, that he died of
joy upon his being declared victor, contrary to his expectation.
The figure of a hive was placed upon his tomb, to perpetuate
the name of Bee, which had been given him, from the sweetness
of his verses: whence, it is probable, the notion was derived,
of the bees having settled upon his lips when in his
cradle.
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3599. Ant. J.C. 405.</note>
He died in his ninetieth year, the fourth of
the ninety-third Olympiad, after having survived
Euripides six years, who was not so old as himself.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3524. Ant. J.C. 480.</note>
The latter was born in the first year of the seventy-fifth
Olympiad, at Salamis, whither his father Mnesarchus
and mother Clito had retired when Xerxes was preparing
for his great expedition against Greece. He
applied himself at first to philosophy, and, amongst others, had
the celebrated Anaxagoras for his master. But the danger
incurred by that great man, who was very near being made the
victim of his philosophical tenets, inclined him to the study of
poetry. He discovered in himself a genius for the drama,
unknown to him at first; and employed it with such success,
that he entered the lists with the great masters of whom we
have been speaking. His works<note place='foot'>Sententiis densus,
et in iis quæ à sapientibus sunt, penè ipsis est par. Quintil.
l. x. c. 1.&mdash;Trans.</note> sufficiently denote his profound
application to philosophy. They abound with excellent
maxims of morality; and it is in that view that Socrates in his
time, and Cicero long after him,<note place='foot'>Cui (Euripidi) tu
quantum credas nescio; ego certè singulos ejus versus singula
testimonia puto. <hi rend='italic'>Epist.</hi> viii. l. 14.
<hi rend='italic'>ad Famil.</hi>&mdash;Trans.</note> set so high a value upon
Euripides.
</p>

<p>
One cannot sufficiently admire the extreme delicacy expressed
by the Athenian audience on certain occasions, and
their solicitude to preserve the reverence due to morality,
virtue, decency, and justice. It is surprising to observe the
warmth with which they unanimously reproved whatever
seemed inconsistent with them, and called the poet to an
account for it, notwithstanding his having a well-founded excuse,
as he had given such sentiments only to persons notoriously
vicious, and actuated by the most unjust passions.
</p>

<p>
Euripides had put into the mouth of Bellerophon a pompous
panegyric upon riches, which concluded with this thought:
<q>Riches are the supreme good of the human race, and with
reason excite the admiration of the gods and men.</q> The whole
theatre cried out against these expressions; and he would have
been banished directly, if he had not desired the sentence to
<pb n='lxxxiv'/><anchor id='Pglxxxiv'/>
be respited till the conclusion of the piece, in which the advocate
for riches perished miserably.
</p>

<p>
He was in danger of incurring serious inconveniences from
an answer he puts into the mouth of Hippolytus. Phædra's
nurse represented to him, that he had engaged himself under
an inviolable oath to keep her secret. <q>My tongue, it is true,
pronounced that oath,</q> replied he, <q>but my heart gave no consent
to it.</q> This frivolous distinction appeared to the whole
people, as an express contempt of the religion and sanctity of
an oath, that tended to banish all sincerity and good faith from
society and the intercourse of life.
</p>

<p>
Another maxim<note place='foot'><p>Ipse autem socer (Cæsar) in ore
semper Græcos versus Euripidis de Phœnissis habebat, quos dicam ut
potero, inconditè fortasse, sed tamen ut res possit intelligi:
</p>
<p>
Nam, si violandum est jus, regnandi gratià<lb/>
Violandum est; aliis rebus pietatem colas.
</p>
<p>
Capitalis Eteocles, vel potiùs Euripides, qui id unum, quod omnium sceleratissimum
fuerat, exceperit. <hi rend='italic'>Offic.</hi> l. iii. n. 82.&mdash;Trans.</p></note>
advanced by Eteocles in the tragedy
called the <hi rend='italic'>Phœnicians</hi>, and which Cæsar had always in his
mouth, is no less pernicious: <q>If justice may be violated at
all, it is when a throne is in question; in other respects, let it
be duly revered.</q> It is highly criminal in Eteocles, or rather
in Euripides, says Cicero, to make an exception in that very
point, wherein such violation is the highest crime that can be
committed. Eteocles is a tyrant, and speaks like a tyrant,
who vindicates his unjust conduct by a false maxim; and it is
not strange that Cæsar, who was a tyrant by nature, and
equally unjust, should lay great stress upon the sentiments of
a prince whom he so much resembled. But what is remarkable
in Cicero, is his falling upon the poet himself, and imputing
to him as a crime the having advanced so pernicious a principle
upon the stage.
</p>

<p>
Lycurgus, the orator,<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>in
vit.</hi> x. <hi rend='italic'>orat.</hi> p. 841.</note>
who lived in the time of Philip and
Alexander the Great, to reanimate the spirit of the tragic
poets, caused three statues of brass to be erected, in the name
of the people, to Æschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides; and
having ordered their works to be transcribed, he appointed
them to be carefully preserved amongst the public archives,
from whence they were taken from time to time to be read;
the players not being permitted to represent them on the
stage.
</p>

<p>
The reader expects, no doubt, after what has been said relating
to the three poets, who invented, improved, and carried
<pb n='lxxxv'/><anchor id='Pglxxxv'/>
tragedy to its perfection, that I should point out the peculiar
excellencies of their style and character. For that I must
refer to father Brumoi, who will do it much better than it is in
my power. After having laid down, as an undoubted principle,
that the epic poem, that is to say Homer, pointed out the way
for the tragic poets; and having demonstrated, by reflections
drawn from human nature, upon what principles and by what
degrees this happy imitation was conducted to its end, he goes
on to describe the three poets above mentioned, in the most
lively and brilliant colours.
</p>

<p>
Tragedy took at first from Æschylus its inventor, a much
more lofty style than the <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>;
that is, the <foreign rend='italic'>magnum loqui</foreign>
mentioned by Horace. Perhaps Æschylus, who had a full
conception of the grandeur of the language of tragedy, carried
it too high. It is not Homer's trumpet, but something more.
His pompous, swelling, gigantic diction, resembles rather the
beating of drums and the shouts of battle, than the noble harmony
of the trumpets. The elevation and grandeur of his
genius would not permit him to speak the language of other
men, so that his Muse seemed rather to walk in stilts, than in
the buskins of his own invention.
</p>

<p>
Sophocles understood much better the true excellence of the
dramatic style: he therefore copies Homer more closely, and
blends in his diction that honeyed sweetness, from whence he
was denominated <q>the Bee,</q> with a gravity that gives his tragedy
the modest air of a matron, compelled to appear in public with
dignity, as Horace expresses it.
</p>

<p>
The style of Euripides, though noble, is less removed from
the familiar; and he seems to have affected rather the pathetic
and the elegant, than the nervous and the lofty.
</p>

<p>
As Corneille, says father Brumoi in another place, after
having opened to himself a path entirely new and unknown to
the ancients, seems like an eagle towering in the clouds, from
the sublimity, force, unbroken progress, and rapidity of his
flight; and, as Racine, in copying the ancients in a manner
entirely his own, imitates the swan, that sometimes floats upon
the air, sometimes rises, then falls again with an elegance of
motion, and a grace peculiar to herself; so Æschylus, Sophocles,
and Euripides, have each of them a particular characteristic
and method. The first, as the inventor and father of
tragedy, is like a torrent rolling impetuously over rocks, forests,
and precipices; the second resembles a canal,<note place='foot'>I know not
whether the idea of <q>a canal, that flows gently through delicious
gardens,</q> is well adapted to designate the character of Sophocles,
which is peculiarly distinguished by nobleness, grandeur, and elevation.
That of an impetuous and rapid stream, whose waves, from the violence
of their motion, are loud, and to be heard afar off, seems to me a more
suitable image of that poet.&mdash;Trans.</note> which flows
<pb n='lxxxvi'/><anchor id='Pglxxxvi'/>
gently through delicious gardens; and the third a river, that
does not follow its course in a continued line, but loves to turn
and wind his silver wave through flowery meads and rural
scenes.
</p>

<p>
This is the character which father Brumoi gives of the three
poets, to whom the Athenian stage was indebted for its perfection
in tragedy. Æschylus<note place='foot'>Tragædias primus in lucem
Æschylus protulit: sublimis et gravis, et grandiloquus
sæpe usque ad vitium; sed rudis in plerisque et incompositus.
Quintil. l. x. c. 1.&mdash;Trans.</note> drew it out of its original chaos
and confusion, and made it appear in some degree of lustre;
but it still retained the rude unfinished air of things in their
beginning, which are generally defective in point of art and
method. Sophocles and Euripides added infinitely to the dignity
of tragedy. The style of the first, as has been observed,
is more noble and majestic; of the latter, more tender and
pathetic; each perfect in their way. In this diversity of character,
it is difficult to decide which is most excellent. The
learned have always been divided upon this head; as we are
at this day, with respect to the two poets of our own nation,<note place='foot'>Corneille
and Racine.&mdash;Trans.</note>
whose tragedies have made our stage illustrious, and not inferior
to that of Athens.
</p>

<p>
I have observed, that the tender and pathetic distinguishes
the compositions of Euripides, of which Alexander of Pheræ,
the most cruel of tyrants, was a proof. That barbarous man,
upon seeing the <hi rend='italic'>Troades</hi> of Euripides acted, found himself so
moved with it, that he quitted the theatre before the conclusion
of the play, professing that he was ashamed to be seen in tears
for the distress of Hecuba and Andromache, who had never
shown the least compassion for his own citizens, of whom he
had butchered such numbers.
</p>

<p>
When I speak of the tender and pathetic, I would not be
understood to mean a passion that softens the heart into
effeminacy, and which, to our reproach, is almost alone, or at
least more than any other passion received upon our stage,
though rejected by the ancients, and condemned by the nations
around us of greatest reputation for their genius, and taste for
the sciences and polite learning. The two great principles for
moving the passions amongst the ancients, were terror and
pity.<note place='foot'>Φόβος καὶ ἔλεος.</note> And, indeed, as we
naturally refer every thing to ourselves,
or our own particular interest, when we see persons of
<pb n='lxxxvii'/><anchor id='Pglxxxvii'/>
exalted rank or virtue sinking under great evils, the fear of the
like misfortunes, with which we know that human life is on all
sides invested, seizes upon us, and from a secret impulse of
self-love we find ourselves sensibly affected with the distresses
of others: besides which, the sharing a common nature<note place='foot'>Homo
sum: humani nihil à me alienum puto. Ter.&mdash;Trans.</note> with
the rest of our species, makes us sensible to whatever befalls
them. Upon a close and attentive inquiry into those two passions,
they will be found the most deeply inherent, active, extensive,
and general affections of the soul; including all orders
of men, great and small, rich and poor, of whatever age or
condition. Hence the ancients, accustomed to consult nature,
and to take her for their guide in all things, with reason conceived
terror and compassion to be the soul of tragedy; and
that those affections ought to prevail in it. The passion of
love was in no estimation amongst them, and had seldom any
share in their dramatic pieces; though with us it is a received
opinion, that they cannot be supported without it.
</p>

<p>
It is worth our trouble to examine briefly in what manner
this passion, which has always been deemed a weakness and a
blemish in the greatest characters, got such footing upon our
stage. Corneille, who was the first who brought the French
tragedy to any perfection, and whom all the rest have followed,
found the whole nation enamoured with the perusal of romances,
and little disposed to admire any thing not resembling
them. From the desire of pleasing his audience, who were at
the same time his judges, he endeavoured to move them in the
manner they had been accustomed to be affected; and, by introducing
love in his scenes, to bring them the nearer to the
predominant taste of the age for romance. From the same
source arose that multiplicity of incidents, episodes, and adventures,
with which our tragic pieces are crowded and obscured;
so contrary to probability, which will not admit such
a number of extraordinary and surprising events in the short
space of four-and-twenty hours; so contrary to the simplicity
of ancient tragedy; and so adapted to conceal, by the assemblage
of so many different objects, the sterility of the genius of
a poet, more intent upon the marvellous, than upon the probable
and natural.
</p>

<p>
Both the Greeks and Romans have preferred the iambic to
the heroic verse in their tragedies; not only because the first
has a kind of dignity better adapted to the stage, but, whilst it
approaches nearer to prose, retains sufficiently the air of poetry
to please the ear; and yet has too little of it to put the audience
<pb n='lxxxviii'/><anchor id='Pglxxxviii'/>
in mind of the poet, who ought not to appear at all in representations,
where other persons are supposed to speak and
act. Monsieur Dacier makes a very just reflection on this
subject. He says, that it is the misfortune of our tragedy to
have almost no other verse than what it has in common with
epic poetry, elegy, pastoral, satire, and comedy; whereas the
learned languages have a great variety of versification.
</p>

<p>
This inconvenience is highly obvious in our tragedy; which
consequently is obliged to lose sight of nature and probability,
as it obliges heroes, princes, kings, and queens, to express
themselves in a pompous strain in their familiar conversation,
which it would be ridiculous to attempt in real life. The
giving utterance to the most impetuous passions in an uniform
cadence, and by hemistichs and rhymes, would undoubtedly be
tedious and offensive to the ear, if the charms of poetry, the
elegance of expression, and the spirit of the sentiments, and
perhaps, more than all of them, the resistless force of custom,
had not in a manner subjected our reason, and spread a veil
before our judgment.
</p>

<p>
It was not chance, therefore, which suggested to the Greeks
the use of iambics in their tragedy. Nature itself seems to have
dictated that kind of verse to them. Instructed by the same
unerring guide, they made choice of a different versification for
the chorus, better adapted to the motions of the dance, and the
variations of the song; because it was necessary for poetry
here to shine out in all its lustre, whilst the mere conversation
between the real actors was suspended. The chorus was an
embellishment of the representation, and a relaxation to the
audience, and therefore required more exalted poetry and
numbers to support it, when united with music and dancing.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Of the Old, Middle, and New Comedy.</head>

<p>
Whilst tragedy was thus rising to perfection at Athens,
comedy, the second species of dramatic poetry, and which, till
then, had been much neglected, began to be cultivated with
more attention. Nature was the common parent of both.
We are sensibly affected with the dangers, distresses, misfortunes,
and, in a word, with whatever relates to the lives and
conduct of illustrious persons; and this gave birth to tragedy.
And we are as curious to know the adventures, conduct, and
defects of our equals; which supply us with occasions of
laughing, and being merry at the expense of others. Hence
comedy derives itself; which is properly an image of private
life. Its design is to expose defects and vices upon the stage,
<pb n='lxxxix'/><anchor id='Pglxxxix'/>
and, by affixing ridicule to them, to make them contemptible;
and, consequently, to instruct by diverting. Ridicule, therefore,
(or, to express the same word by another, pleasantry,)
ought to prevail in comedy.
</p>

<p>
This species of entertainment took at different times three
different forms at Athens, as well from the genius of the poets,
as from the influence of the government, which occasioned
various alterations in it.
</p>

<p>
The old comedy, so called by Horace,<note place='foot'>Successit vetus
his comœdia non sinc multâ Laude. Hor.
<hi rend='italic'>in Art. Poët.</hi>&mdash;Trans.</note> and which he dates
after the time of Æschylus, retained something of its original
rudeness, and the liberty it had been used to take of throwing
out coarse jests and reviling the spectators from the cart of
Thespis. Though it was become regular in its plan, and worthy
of a great theatre, it had not learnt to be more reserved.
It represented real transactions, with the names, dress, gestures,
and likeness, in masks, of whomsoever it thought fit to
sacrifice to the public derision. In a state where it was held
good policy to unmask whatever carried the air of ambition,
singularity, or knavery, comedy assumed the privilege to
harangue, reform, and advise the people upon their most important
interests. No one was spared in a city of so much
liberty, or rather licentiousness, as Athens was at that time.
Generals, magistrates, government, the very gods were abandoned
to the poet's satirical vein; and all was well received,
provided the comedy was diverting, and the Attic salt not
wanting.
</p>

<p>
In one of these comedies,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Plutus.</hi></note>
not only the priest of Jupiter
determines to quit his service, because no more sacrifices are
offered to the god; but Mercury himself comes, in a starving
condition, to seek his fortune amongst mankind, and offers to
serve as a porter, sutler, bailiff, guide, door-keeper; in short,
in any capacity, rather than return to heaven. In
another,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Birds.</hi></note>
the same gods, reduced to the extremity of famine, from the
birds having built a city in the air, whereby their provisions
are cut off, and the smoke of incense and sacrifices prevented
from ascending to heaven, depute three ambassadors in the
name of Jupiter to conclude a treaty of accommodation with
the birds, upon such conditions as they shall approve. The
chamber of audience, where the three famished gods are
received, is a kitchen well stored with excellent game of all
sorts. Here Hercules, deeply smitten with the smell of roast
<pb n='xc'/><anchor id='Pgxc'/>
meat, which he apprehends to be more exquisite and nutritious
than that of incense, begs leave to make his abode, and to
turn the spit, and assist the cook upon occasion. The other
pieces of Aristophanes abound with strokes still more satirical
and severe upon the principal divinities.
</p>

<p>
I am not much surprised at the poet's insulting the gods,
and treating them with the utmost contempt, as from them he
had nothing fear; but I cannot help wondering at his having
brought the most illustrious and powerful persons of Athens
upon the stage, and presuming to attack the government itself,
without any manner of respect or reserve.
</p>

<p>
Cleon having returned triumphant, contrary to the general
expectation, from the expedition against Sphacteria, was looked
upon by the people as the greatest captain of that age. Aristophanes,
to set that bad man in a true light, who was the
son of a tanner, and a tanner himself, and whose rise was owing
solely to his temerity and impudence, was so bold as to make
him the subject of a comedy,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The
Knights.</hi></note> without being awed by his power
and influence: but he was obliged to play the part of Cleon
himself, and appeared for the first time upon the stage in that
character; not one of the comedians daring to represent it, nor
to expose himself to the resentment of so formidable an enemy.
His face was smeared over with wine-lees; because no workman
could be found, that would venture to make a mask
resembling Cleon, as was usual when persons were brought
upon the stage. In this piece he reproaches him with embezzling
the public treasures, with a violent passion for bribes and
presents, with craft in seducing the people, and denies him the
glory of the action at Sphacteria, which he attributes chiefly
to the share his colleague had in it.
</p>

<p>
In the <hi rend='italic'>Acharnians</hi>, he accuses Lamachus of having been
made general, rather by bribery than merit. He imputes to
him his youth, inexperience, and idleness; at the same time
that he, and many others, whom he covertly designates, convert
to their own use the rewards due only to valour and real services.
He reproaches the republic with their preference of the
younger citizens to the elder, in the government of the state,
and the command of their armies. He tells them plainly, that
when peace shall be concluded, neither Cleonymus, Hyperbolus,
nor many other such knaves, all mentioned by name,
shall have any share in the public affairs; they being always
ready to accuse their fellow-citizens of crimes, and to enrich
themselves by such informations.
</p>

<pb n='xci'/><anchor id='Pgxci'/>

<p>
In his comedy called the <hi rend='italic'>Wasps</hi>, imitated by Racine in his
<hi rend='italic'>Plaideurs</hi>, he exposes the mad passion of the people for
prosecutions and trials at law, and the enormous injustice frequently
committed in passing sentence and giving judgment.
</p>

<p>
The poet,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Peace.</hi></note>
concerned to see the republic obstinately bent
upon the unhappy expedition to Sicily, endeavours to excite in
the people a thorough disgust for so ruinous a war, and to
inspire them with the desire of a peace, as much the interest of
the victors as the vanquished, after a war of several years'
duration, equally pernicious to each party, and capable of
involving all Greece in ruin.
</p>

<p>
None of Aristophanes's pieces explains better his boldness,
in speaking upon the most delicate affairs of the state in the
crowded theatre, than his comedy called <hi rend='italic'>Lysistrata</hi>. One of
the principal magistrates of Athens had a wife of that name,
who is supposed to have taken it into her head to compel
Greece to conclude a peace. She relates, how, during the
war, the women inquiring of their husbands the result of their
counsels, and whether they had not resolved to make peace
with Sparta, received no answers but imperious looks, and
orders to mind their own business: that, however, they perceived
plainly to what a low condition the government was
declined: that they took the liberty to remonstrate mildly to
their husbands upon the sad consequences of their rash determinations,
but that their humble representations had no other
effect than to offend and enrage them: that, at length, being
confirmed by the general opinion of all Attica, that there were
no longer any men in the state, nor heads for the administration
of affairs, their patience being quite exhausted, the women had
thought it proper and advisable to take the government upon
themselves, and preserve Greece, whether it would or no,
from the folly and madness of its resolves. <q>For her part,
she declares, that she has taken possession of the city and
treasury, in order,</q> says she, <q>to prevent Pisander and his
confederates, the four hundred administrators, from exciting
troubles, according to their custom, and from robbing the
public as usual.</q> (Was ever any thing so bold?) She goes
on to prove, that the women only are capable of retrieving
affairs by this burlesque argument; that admitting things to be
in such a state of perplexity and confusion, the sex, accustomed
to untangling their threads, were the only persons to
set them right again, as being best qualified with the necessary
address, patience, and moderation. The Athenian politics are
<pb n='xcii'/><anchor id='Pgxcii'/>
thus made inferior to those of the women, who are only represented
in a ridiculous light, to turn the derision upon their
husbands, who were engaged in the administration of the
government.
</p>

<p>
These extracts from Aristophanes, taken almost word for
word from father Brumoi, seemed to me very proper to give
an insight into that poet's character, and the genius of the
ancient comedy, which was, as we see, a satire of the most
poignant and severe kind, that had assumed to itself an independency
from respect to persons, and to which nothing was
sacred. It is no wonder that Cicero condemns so licentious
and uncurbed a liberty. It might, he says,<note place='foot'>Quem illa
non attigit, vel potiùs quem non vexavit? Esto, populares homines, improbos,
in remp. seditiosos, Cleonem, Cleophontem, Hyperbolum læsit: patiamur&mdash;Sed
Periclem, cùm jam suæ civitati maximâ auctoritate plurimos annos domi et belli
præfuisset, violari versibus, et eos agi in scenâ, non plùs decuit, quam si Plautus
noster voluisset, aut Nævius, P. et Cn. Scipioni, aut Cæcilius M. Catoni maledicere.
Ex fragm. Cic. <hi rend='italic'>de Rep.</hi> l. iv.&mdash;Trans.</note> have been
tolerable, had it attacked only bad citizens, and seditious
orators, who endeavoured to raise commotions in the state,
such as Cleon, Cleophon, and Hyperbolus; but when a
Pericles, who for many years had governed the commonwealth
both in war and peace with equal wisdom and authority (he
might have added, and a Socrates, declared by Apollo the
wisest of mankind) is brought upon the stage to be laughed at
by the public, it is as if our Plautus or Nævius had attacked
the Scipios, or Cæcilius had dared to revile Marcus Cato in
his plays.
</p>

<p>
That liberty is still more offensive to us, who are born, and
live under a monarchical government, which is far from being
favourable to licentiousness. But without intending to justify
the conduct of Aristophanes, which is certainly inexcusable, I
think, to judge properly of it, it would be necessary to lay
aside the prejudices of birth, nations, and times, and to imagine
we live in those remote ages in a state purely democratical.
We must not fancy Aristophanes to have been a person of
little consequence in his republic, as the comic writers generally
are in our days. The king of Persia had a very different
idea of him.<note place='foot'>Aristophan. <hi rend='italic'>in
Acharn.</hi></note> It is a known story, that in an audience of the
Greek ambassadors, his first inquiry was after a certain comic
poet (meaning Aristophanes) that put all Greece in motion,
and gave such effectual counsels against him. Aristophanes
did that upon the stage, which Demosthenes did afterwards in
the public assemblies. The poet's reproaches were no less
animated than the orator's. In his comedies he uttered the
<pb n='xciii'/><anchor id='Pgxciii'/>
same sentiments as he had a right to deliver from the public
rostrum. They were addressed to the same people, upon the
same occasions of the state, the same means of success, and
the same obstacles to their measures. In Athens the whole
people were the sovereign, and each of them had an equal
share in the supreme authority. Upon this they were continually
intent, were fond of discoursing upon it themselves, and
of hearing the sentiments of others. The public affairs were
the business of every individual, on which they were desirous
of being fully informed, that they might know how to conduct
themselves on every occasion of war or peace, which frequently
offered, and to decide upon their own, as well as upon the
destiny of their allies or enemies. Hence rose the liberty
taken by the comic poets, of discussing affairs of the state in
their performances. The people were so far from being
offended at it, or at the manner in which those writers treated
the principal persons of the state, that they conceived their
liberty in some measure to consist in it.
</p>

<p>
Three poets<note place='foot'><p>Eupolis, atque Cratinus, Aristophanesque poëtæ,<lb/>
Atque alii, quorum comœdia prisca virorum est,<lb/>
Si quis erat dignus describi, quòd malus, aut fur,<lb/>
Quòd mœchus foret, aut sicarius, aut alioqui<lb/>
Famosus; multâ cum libertate notabant.
</p>
<p>
Hor. <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> iv. l. i.
</p>
<p>
With Aristophanes' satiric rage,<lb/>
When ancient comedy amus'd the age,<lb/>
Or Eupolis's or Cratinus' wit,<lb/>
And others that all-licens'd poem writ;<lb/>
None, worthy to be shown, escap'd the scene,<lb/>
No public knave, or thief of lofty mien;<lb/>
The loose adult'rer was drawn forth to sight;<lb/>
The secret murd'rer trembling lurk'd the night;<lb/>
Vice play'd itself, and each ambitious spark;<lb/>
All boldly branded with the poet's mark.<lb/>
</p>
<p>
&mdash;Trans.</p></note> particularly excelled in the old comedy;
Eupolis, Cratinus, and Aristophanes. The last is the only one
of them, whose pieces have come down to us entire; and, out of
the great number which he composed, eleven are all that remain.
He flourished in an age when Greece abounded with great
men, and was contemporary with Socrates and Euripides,
whom he survived. During the Peloponnesian war, he made
his greatest figure; less as a writer to amuse the people with
his comedies, than as a censor of the government, retained to
reform the state, and to be almost the arbiter of his country.
</p>

<p>
He is admired for an elegance, poignancy, and happiness of
expression, or, in a word, that Attic salt and spirit, to which
the Roman language could never attain, and for which
Aristophanes<note place='foot'>Antiqua comœdia sinceram illam sermonis Attici
gratiam propè sola retinet. Quintil.&mdash;Trans.</note>
<pb n='xciv'/><anchor id='Pgxciv'/>
is more remarkable than any other of the Greek
authors. His particular excellence was raillery. None ever
touched what was ridiculous in the characters whom he wished
to expose with such success, or knew better how to convey it
in all its full force to others. But it would be necessary to
have lived in his times, to be qualified to judge of this. The
subtle salt and spirit of the ancient raillery, according to father
Brumoi, is evaporated through length of time, and what remains
of it is become flat and insipid to us; though the sharpest
part will retain its vigour throughout all ages.
</p>

<p>
Two considerable defects are justly imputed to this poet,
which very much obscure, if not entirely efface, his glory.
These are, low buffoonery, and gross obscenity; and it has in
vain been attempted to offer, in excuse for the first of these
faults, the character of his audience; the bulk of which generally
consisted of the poor, the ignorant, and dregs of the
people, whom, however, it was as necessary to please, as the
learned and the rich. The depraved taste of the lower order
of people, which once banished Cratinus and his company,
because his scenes were not grossly comic enough for them, is
no excuse for Aristophanes, as Menander could find out the
art of changing that grovelling taste, by introducing a species
of comedy, not altogether so modest as Plutarch seems to
insinuate, yet much less licentious than any before his time.
</p>

<p>
The gross obscenities, with which all Aristophanes's comedies
abound, have no excuse; they only denote to what a pitch
the libertinism of the spectators, and the depravity of the poet,
had proceeded. Had he even impregnated them with the
utmost wit, which however is not the case, the privilege of
laughing himself, or of making others laugh, would have been
too dearly purchased at the expense of decency and good
manners.<note place='foot'>Nimium risûs pretium est, si
probitatis impendio constat. Quintil. l. vi. c. 3.&mdash;Trans.</note>
And in this case it may well be said, that it were
better to have no wit at all, than to make so ill a use of it.<note place='foot'>Non
pejus duxerim tardi ingenii esse, quàm mali. Quintil. l. i. c. 3.&mdash;Trans.</note>
F. Brumoi is very much to be commended for having taken
care, in giving a general idea of Aristophanes's writings, to
throw a veil over those parts of them that might have given
offence to modesty. Though such behaviour be the indispensable
rule of religion, it is not always observed by those who
pique themselves most on their erudition, and sometimes prefer
the title of scholar to that of Christian.
</p>

<p>
The old comedy subsisted till Lysander's time; who, upon
having made himself master of Athens, changed the form or
<pb n='xcv'/><anchor id='Pgxcv'/>
the government, and put it into the hands of thirty of the
principal citizens. The satirical liberty of the theatre was
offensive to them, and therefore they thought fit to put a stop
to it. The reason of this alteration is evident, and confirms
the reflection made before upon the privilege which the poets
possessed of criticizing with impunity the persons at the head
of the state. The whole authority of Athens was then invested
in tyrants. The democracy was abolished. The people had
no longer any share in the government. They were no more
the prince; their sovereignty had expired. The right of giving
their opinions and suffrages upon affairs of state was at an
end; nor dared they, either in their own persons or by the
poets, presume to censure the sentiments and conduct of their
masters. The calling persons by their names upon the stage
was prohibited: but poetical ill-nature soon found the secret
of eluding the intention of the law, and of making itself
amends for the restraint which was imposed upon it by the
necessity of using feigned names. It then applied itself to
discover what was ridiculous in known characters, which it
copied to the life, and from thence acquired the double advantage
of gratifying the vanity of the poets, and the malice of the
audience, in a more refined manner: the one had the delicate
pleasure of putting the spectators upon guessing their meaning,
and the other of not being mistaken in their suppositions, and
of affixing the right name to the characters represented. Such
was the comedy, since called the <hi rend='italic'>Middle Comedy</hi>, of which
there are some instances in Aristophanes.
</p>

<p>
It continued till the time of Alexander the Great, who,
having entirely assured himself of the empire of Greece by the
defeat of the Thebans, caused a check to be put upon the
licentiousness of the poets, which increased daily. From
thence the <hi rend='italic'>New Comedy</hi> took its birth, which was only an
imitation of private life, and brought nothing upon the stage
but feigned names, and fictitious adventures.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Chacun peint avec art dans ce nouveau miroir,</l>
<l>S'y vit avec plaisir, ou crut ne s'y pas voir.</l>
<l>L'avare des premiers rit du tableau fidèle</l>
<l>D'un avare souvent tracé sur son modèle;</l>
<l>Et mille fois un fat, finement exprimé,</l>
<l>Méconnut le portrait sur lui-mème formé.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>In this new glass, whilst each himself survey'd,</l>
<l>He sat with pleasure, though himself was play'd:</l>
<l>The miser grinn'd whilst avarice was drawn,</l>
<l>Nor thought the faithful likeness was his own;</l>
<l>His own dear self no imag'd fool could find,</l>
<l>But saw a thousand other fops design'd.<note place='foot'>Boileau,
<hi rend='italic'>Art. Poet.</hi>, chant. iii.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='xcvi'/><anchor id='Pgxcvi'/>

<p>
This may properly be called fine comedy, and is that of
Menander. Of one hundred and eighty, or rather eighty plays,
according to Suidas, composed by him, all of which Terence
is said to have translated, there remain only a few fragments.
We may form a judgment of the merit of the originals from
the excellence of the copy. Quintilian, in speaking of Menander,
is not afraid to say,<note place='foot'>Atque ille quidem omnibus
ejusdem operis auctoribus abstulit nomen, et fulgore
quodam suæ claritatis tenebras obduxit. Quintil. l. x. c.
1.&mdash;Trans.</note> that with the beauty of his works,
and the height of his reputation, he obscured, or rather obliterated,
the fame of all other writers in the same way. He
observes in another passage,<note place='foot'>Quidam, sicut Menander,
justiora posterorum quàm suæ ætatis, judicia sunt
consecuti. Quintil. l. iii. c. 6.&mdash;Trans.</note> that his own times were not so
just to his merit as they ought to have been, which has
been the fate of many others; but that he was sufficiently
made amends by the favourable opinion of posterity. And
indeed Philemon, a comic poet, who flourished about the same
period, though older than Menander, was preferred before
him.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Theatre of the Ancients described.</head>

<p>
I have already observed, that Æschylus was the first founder
of a fixed and durable theatre adorned with suitable decorations.
It was at first, as well as the amphitheatres, composed
of wooden planks, the seats in which rose one above another;
but those having one day broke down, by having too great a
weight upon them, the Athenians, excessively enamoured of
dramatic representations, were induced by that accident to
erect those superb structures, which were imitated afterwards
with so much splendour by the Roman magnificence. What
I shall say of them, has almost as much relation to the Roman
as the Athenian theatres; and is extracted entirely from M.
Boindin's learned dissertation upon the theatre of the
ancients,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Memoirs of the Acad.
of Inscript.</hi> &amp;c. vol i. p. 136, &amp;c.</note>
who has treated the subject in its fullest extent.
</p>

<p>
The theatre of the ancients was divided into three principal
parts; each of which had its peculiar appellation. The division
for the actors was called in general the scene, or stage;
that for the spectators was particularly termed the theatre,
which must have been of vast extent,<note place='foot'>Strab. l.
ix. p. 395. Herod. l. viii. c. 65.</note> as at Athens it was
capable of containing above thirty thousand persons; and the
orchestra, which amongst the Greeks was the place assigned for
<pb n='xcvii'/><anchor id='Pgxcvii'/>
the pantomimes and dancers, though at Rome it was appropriated
to the senators and vestal virgins.
</p>

<p>
The theatre was of a semicircular form on one side, and
square on the other. The space contained within the semicircle
was allotted to the spectators, and had seats placed one
above another to the top of the building. The square part in
the front of it was appropriated to the actors; and in the interval,
between both, was the orchestra.
</p>

<p>
The great theatres had three rows of porticoes, raised one
upon another, which formed the body of the edifice, and at
the same time three different stories for the seats. From the
highest of those porticoes the women saw the representation,
sheltered from the weather. The rest of the theatre was
uncovered, and all the business of the stage was performed in
the open air.
</p>

<p>
Each of these stories consisted of nine rows of seats, including
the landing-place, which divided them from each other,
and served as a passage from side to side. But as this landing-place
and passage took up the space of two benches, there
were only seven to sit upon, and consequently in each story
there were seven rows of seats. They were from fifteen to
eighteen inches in height, and twice as much in breadth; so
that the spectators had room to sit at their ease, and without
being incommoded by the legs of the people above them, no
foot-boards being provided for them.
</p>

<p>
Each of these stories of benches were divided in two different
manners; in their height by the landing-places, called by the
Romans <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Præcinctiones</foreign>,
and in their circumferences by several
staircases, peculiar to each story, which intersecting them in
right lines, tending towards the centre of the theatre, gave the
form of wedges to the quantity of seats between them, from
whence they were called <foreign rend='italic'>Cunei</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Behind these stories of seats were covered galleries, through
which the people thronged into the theatre by great square
openings, contrived for that purpose in the walls next the seats.
Those openings were called <foreign rend='italic'>Vomitoria</foreign>,
from the multitude of people crowding through them into their places.
</p>

<p>
As the actors could not be heard to the extremity of the
theatre, the Greeks contrived a means to supply that defect,
and to augment the force of the voice, and make it more
distinct and articulate. For that purpose they invented a kind
of large vessels of copper, which were disposed under the seats
of the theatre, in such a manner, as made all sounds strike
upon the ear with more force and distinctness.
</p>

<p>
The orchestra being situated, as I have observed, between
<pb n='xcviii'/><anchor id='Pgxcviii'/>
the two other parts of the theatre, of which one was circular,
and the other square, it participated of the form of each, and
occupied the space between both. It was divided into three
parts.
</p>

<p>
The first and most considerable was more particularly called
the orchestra, from a Greek word<note place='foot'>Ὀρχεῖσθαι.</note>
that signifies to dance. It
was appropriated to the pantomimes and dancers, and to all
such subaltern actors as played between the acts, and at the
end of the representations.
</p>

<p>
The second was named θυλέλη, from its being square, in the
form of an altar. Here the chorus was generally placed.
</p>

<p>
And in the third the Greeks disposed their band of music.
They called it ὑποσκήνιον, from its being situate at the bottom
of the principal part of the theatre, to which they gave the
general name of the scene.
</p>

<p>
I shall describe here this third part of the theatre, called the
scene; which was also subdivided into three different parts.
</p>

<p>
The first and most considerable was properly called the
scene, and gave its name to this whole division. It occupied
the whole front of the building from side to side, and was the
place allotted for the decorations. This front had two small
wings at its extremity, from which hung a large curtain, that
was let down to open the scene, and drawn up between the
acts, when any thing in the representation made it necessary.
</p>

<p>
The second, called by the Greeks indifferently προσκήνιον,
and λοτεῖον and by the Romans <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>proscenium</foreign>,
and <foreign rend='italic'>pulpitum</foreign>, was
a large open space in front of the scene, in which the actors
performed their parts, and which, by the help of the decorations,
represented either a public square or forum, a common
street, or the country; but the place so represented was always
in the open air.
</p>

<p>
The third division was a part reserved behind the scenes,
and called by the Greeks παρασκήνιον. Here the actors dressed
themselves, and the decorations were locked up. In the same
place were also kept the machines, of which the ancients had
abundance in their theatres.
</p>

<p>
As only the porticoes and the building of the scene were
roofed, it was necessary to draw sails, fastened with cords to
masts, over the rest of the theatre, to screen the audience from
the heat of the sun. But as this contrivance did not prevent
the heat, occasioned by the perspiration and breath of so
numerous an assembly, the ancients took care to allay it by a
kind of rain; conveying the water for that use above the porticoes,
<pb n='xcix'/><anchor id='Pgxcix'/>
which falling again in form of dew through an infinity
of small pores concealed in the statues, with which the theatre
abounded, did not only diffuse a grateful coolness all around,
but the most fragrant exhalations along with it; for this dew
was always perfumed. Whenever the representations were
interrupted by storms, the spectators retired into the porticoes
behind the seats of the theatre.
</p>

<p>
The fondness of the Athenians for representations of this
kind cannot be expressed. Their eyes, their ears, their imagination,
their understanding, all shared in the satisfaction.
Nothing gave them so sensible a pleasure in dramatic performances,
either tragic or comic, as the strokes which were
aimed at the affairs of the public; whether pure chance occasioned
the application, or the address of the poets, who knew
how to reconcile the most remote subjects with the transactions
of the republic. They entered by that means into the interests
of the people, took occasion to soothe their passions, authorize
their pretensions, justify, and sometimes condemn, their conduct,
entertain them with agreeable hopes, instruct them in
their duty in certain nice conjunctures; in consequence of
which they often not only acquired the applauses of the spectators,
but credit and influence in the public affairs and counsels:
hence the theatre became so grateful and so interesting
to the people. It was in this manner, according to some authors,
that Euripides artfully adapted his tragedy of
<hi rend='italic'>Palamedes</hi><note place='foot'>It is not certain
whether this piece was prior or posterior to the death of
Socrates.&mdash;Trans.</note>
to the sentence passed against Socrates; and pointed out, by
an illustrious example of antiquity, the innocence of a philosopher,
oppressed by malignity supported by power and faction.
</p>

<p>
Accident was often the occasion of sudden and unforeseen
applications, which from their appositeness were very agreeable
to the people. Upon this verse of Æschylus, in praise of
Amphiaraus,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 8'>&mdash;&mdash; 'Tis his desire</l>
<l>Not to appear, but be the great and good,</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
the whole audience rose up, and unanimously applied it to
Aristides.<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>in Aristid.</hi> p.
320.</note> The same thing happened to Philopœmen at the
Nemæan games. At the instant he entered the theatre, these
verses were singing upon the stage:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 8'>&mdash;&mdash; He comes, to whom we owe</l>
<l>Our liberty, the noblest good below.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='c'/><anchor id='Pgc'/>

<p>
All the Greeks cast their eyes upon Philopœmen,<note place='foot'>Plut.
<hi rend='italic'>in Philipœm.</hi> p. 362.</note> and with
clapping of hands and acclamations of joy expressed their
veneration for the hero.
</p>

<p>
In the same manner at Rome, during the banishment of
Cicero,<note place='foot'>Cic. <hi rend='italic'>in Orat. pro.
Sext.</hi> n. 120, 123.</note> when some verses of Accius,<note place='foot'><p>O
ingratifici Argivi, inanes Graii, immemores beneficii,<lb/>
Exulare sivistis, sivistis pelli, pulsum patimini.
</p>
<p>
&mdash;Trans.</p></note> which reproached the
Greeks with their ingratitude in suffering the banishment of
Telamon, were repeated by Æsop, the best actor of his time,
they drew tears from the eyes of the whole assembly.
</p>

<p>
Upon another, though very different, occasion, the Roman
people applied to Pompey the Great some verses to this effect:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>'Tis our unhappiness has made thee great;<note place='foot'>Cic.
<hi rend='italic'>ad Attic.</hi> l. ii. <hi rend='italic'>Epist.</hi>
19. Val. Max. l. vi. c. 2.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
and then addressing the people;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>The time shall come when you shall late deplore</l>
<l>So great a power confided to such hands;</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
the spectators obliged the actor to repeat these verses several
times.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Fondness for Theatrical Representations one of the principal
Causes of the Decline, Degeneracy, and Corruption of the
Athenian State.</head>

<p>
When we compare the happy times of Greece, in which
Europe and Asia resounded with nothing but the fame of the
Athenian victories, with the later ages, when the power of
Philip and Alexander the Great had in a manner reduced it to
slavery, we shall be surprised at the strange alteration in that
republic. But what is most material, is the investigation of
the causes and progress of this declension; and these M. de
Tourreil has discussed in an admirable manner in the elegant
preface to his translation of Demosthenes's orations.
</p>

<p>
There were no longer, he observes, at Athens any traces of
that manly and vigorous policy, equally capable of planning
good and retrieving bad success. Instead of that, there remained
only an inconsistent loftiness, apt to evaporate in pompous
decrees. They were no more those Athenians, who,
when menaced by a deluge of barbarians, demolished their
houses to build ships with the timber, and whose women
stoned the abject wretch to death that proposed to appease the
great king by tribute or homage. The love of ease and pleasure
<pb n='ci'/><anchor id='Pgci'/>
had almost entirely extinguished that of glory, liberty, and
independence.
</p>

<p>
Pericles, that great man, so absolute, that those who envied
him treated him as a second Pisistratus, was the first author of
this degeneracy and corruption. With the design of conciliating
the favour of the people, he ordained that upon such days
as games or sacrifices were celebrated, a certain number of
oboli should be distributed amongst them; and that in the
assemblies in which affairs of state were to be discussed, every
individual should receive a certain pecuniary gratification in
right of being present. Thus the members of the republic
were seen for the first time to sell their care in the administration
of the government, and to rank amongst servile employments
the most noble functions of the sovereign power.
</p>

<p>
It was not difficult to foresee where so excessive an abuse
would end: and to remedy it, it was proposed to establish a
fund for the support of the war, and to make it a capital crime
to advise, upon any account whatsoever, the application of it
to other uses: but, notwithstanding, the abuse always subsisted.
At first it seemed tolerable, whilst the citizen, who was supported
at the public expense, endeavoured to deserve it by
doing his duty in the field for nine months together. Every
one was to serve in his turn, and whoever failed was treated as
a deserter without distinction: but at length the number of the
transgressors carried it against the law; and impunity, as it
commonly happens, multiplied their number. People accustomed
to the delightful abode of a city, where feasts and games
were perpetually taking place, conceived an invincible repugnance
for labour and fatigue, which they looked upon as unworthy
of free-born men.
</p>

<p>
It was therefore necessary to find amusement for this indolent
people, to fill up the great void of an unactive, useless life.
Hence arose principally their fondness, or rather frenzy, for
public shows. The death of Epaminondas, which seemed to
promise them the greatest advantage, gave the final stroke to
their ruin and destruction. <q>Their courage,</q> says Justin,<note place='foot'>Justin,
l. vi. c. 9.</note>
<q>did not survive that illustrious Theban. Freed from a rival,
who kept their emulation alive, they sunk into a lethargic sloth
and effeminacy. The funds for armaments by land and sea
were soon lavished upon games and feasts. The seaman's and
soldier's pay was distributed to the idle citizen. An indolent
and luxurious mode of life enervated every breast. The representations
of the theatre were preferred to the exercises of the
<pb n='cii'/><anchor id='Pgcii'/>
camp. Valour and military knowledge were entirely disregarded.
Great captains were in no estimation; whilst good
poets and excellent comedians engrossed the universal applause.</q>
</p>

<p>
Extravagance of this kind makes it easy to comprehend in
what multitudes the people thronged to the dramatic performances.
As no expense was spared in embellishing them,
exorbitant sums were sunk in the service of the theatre. <q>If,</q>
says Plutarch,<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>de glor.
Athen.</hi> p. 349.</note> <q>an accurate calculation were to be made what
each representation of the dramatic pieces cost the Athenians,
it would appear, that their expenses in playing the
<hi rend='italic'>Bacchanalians</hi>, the <hi rend='italic'>Phœnicians</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Œdipus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Antigone</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Medea</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Electra</hi>,
(tragedies written either by Sophocles or Euripides,) were
greater than those which had been employed against the Barbarians,
in defence of the liberty and for the preservation of
Greece.</q> This gave a Spartan just reason to exclaim, on seeing
an estimate of the enormous sums laid out in these contests of
the tragic poets, and the extraordinary pains taken by the
magistrates who presided in them,<note place='foot'>Plut.
<hi rend='italic'>Sympos.</hi> l. vii. <hi rend='italic'>quæst.</hi>
vii. p. 719.</note> <q>that a people must be void
of sense to apply themselves in so warm and serious a manner
to things so frivolous. For,</q> added he, <q>games should be only
games; and nothing is more unreasonable than to purchase a
short and trivial amusement at so great a price. Pleasures of
this kind agree only with public rejoicings and seasons of
festivity, and were designed to divert people at their leisure
hours; but should by no means interfere with the affairs of the
public, nor the necessary expenses of the government.</q>
</p>

<p>
After all, says Plutarch, in the passage which I have already
cited, of what utility have these tragedies been to Athens,
though so much boasted by the people, and admired by the
rest of the world? I find that the prudence of Themistocles
enclosed the city with strong walls; that the fine taste and
magnificence of Pericles improved and adorned it; that the
noble fortitude of Miltiades preserved its liberty; and that the
moderate conduct of Cimon acquired it the empire and government
of all Greece. If the wise and learned poetry of
Euripides, the sublime diction of Sophocles, the lofty buskin
of Æschylus, have obtained equal advantages for the city of
Athens, by delivering it from impending calamities, or by adding
to its glory, I am willing (he goes on) that dramatic pieces
should be placed in competition with trophies of victory, the
poetic theatre with the field of battle, and the compositions of
the poets with the great exploits of the generals. But what a
<pb n='ciii'/><anchor id='Pgciii'/>
comparison would this be? On the one side would be seen a
few writers, crowned with wreaths of ivy, and dragging a goat
or an ox after them, the rewards and victims assigned them for
excelling in tragic poetry: on the other, a train of illustrious
captains, surrounded by the colonies which they founded, the
cities which they captured, and the nations which they subjected.
It is not to perpetuate the victories of Æschylus and
Sophocles, but in remembrance of the glorious battles of Marathon,
Salamis, Eurymedon, and many others, that so many
feasts are celebrated every month with such pomp by the
Grecians.
</p>

<p>
The inference which Plutarch draws from hence, in which
we ought to agree with him, is,<note place='foot'>Ἀμαρτάνουσιν
Ἀθηναῖοι μεγάλα. τὴν σπουδὴν εὶς τὴν παιδιὰν καταναλίσκοντες,
τουτεστι μεγάλων ἀποστόλων δαπάνας καὶ στρατευμάτων ἐφύδια καταχορηγοῦντες εἰς τὸ
θέατρον.&mdash;Trans.</note> that it was the highest imprudence
in the Athenians thus to prefer pleasure to duty, fondness
for the theatre to the love of their country, trivial shows
to application to public business, and to consume, in useless
expenses and dramatic entertainments, the funds intended for
the support of fleets and armies. Macedon, till then obscure
and inconsiderable, well knew how to take advantage of the
Athenian indolence and effeminacy;<note place='foot'>Quibus rebus
effectum est, ut inter otia Græecorum, sordidum et obscurum antea
Macedonum nomen emergeret; et Philippus, obses triennio Thebis habitus, Epaminondæ
et Pelopidæ virtutibus eruditus, regnum Macedoniæ, Græciæ et Asiæ cervicibus,
velut jugum servitutis, imponeret. Just. l. vi. c. 9.&mdash;Trans.</note> and Philip,
instructed by the Greeks themselves, amongst whom he had for several
years applied himself successfully to the art of war, was not
long before he gave Greece a master, and subjected it to the
yoke, as we shall see in the sequel.
</p>

<p>
I am now to open an entirely new scene to the reader's view,
not unworthy his curiosity and attention. We have seen two
states of no great consideration, Media and Persia, extend
themselves far and wide, under the conduct of Cyrus, like a
torrent or a conflagration; and, with amazing rapidity, conquer
and subdue many provinces and kingdoms. We shall see now
that vast empire setting the nations under its dominion in motion,
the Persians, Medes, Phœnicians, Egyptians, Babylonians,
Indians, and many others; and falling, with all the
forces of Asia and the East upon a little country, of very small
extent, and destitute of all foreign assistance; I mean Greece.
When, on the one hand, we behold so many nations united
together, such preparations of war made for several years with
so much diligence; innumerable armies by sea and land, and
such fleets as the sea could hardly contain; and, on the other
<pb n='civ'/><anchor id='Pgciv'/>
hand, two weak cities, Athens and Lacedæmon, abandoned by
all their allies, and left almost entirely to themselves; have we
not reason to believe, that these two little cities are going to be
utterly destroyed and swallowed up by so formidable an enemy;
and that no footsteps of them will be left remaining? And
yet we shall find that they will prove victorious; and by their
invincible courage, and the several battles they gain, both by
sea and land, will make the Persian empire lay aside all
thoughts of ever again turning their arms against Greece.
</p>

<p>
The history of the war between the Persians and the Greeks
will illustrate the truth of this maxim, that it is not the number,
but the valour of the troops, and the conduct of the
generals, on which depends the success of military expeditions.
The reader will admire the surprising courage and intrepidity
of the great men at the head of the Grecian affairs, whom
neither all the world in motion against them could deject, nor
the greatest misfortunes disconcert; who undertook, with an
handful of men, to make head against innumerable armies;
who, notwithstanding such a prodigious inequality of forces,
dared to hope for success; who even compelled victory to declare
on the side of merit and virtue; and taught all succeeding
generations what infinite resources are to be found in prudence,
valour, and experience; in a zeal for liberty and our
country; in the love of our duty; and in all the sentiments of
noble and generous souls.
</p>

<p>
This war of the Persians against the Grecians will be followed
by another amongst the Greeks themselves, but of a very different
kind from the former. In the latter, there will scarce be
any actions, but what in appearance are of little consequence,
and seemingly unworthy of a reader's curiosity who is fond of
great events; in this he will meet with little besides private
quarrels between certain cities, or some small commonwealths;
some inconsiderable sieges, (excepting that of Syracuse, one of
the most important related in ancient history,) though several
of these sieges were of no short duration; some battles between
armies, where the numbers were small, and but little blood
shed. What is it, then, that has rendered these wars so famous
in history? Sallust informs us in these words: <q>The actions
of the Athenians doubtless were great; and yet I believe they
were somewhat less than fame will have us conceive of them.
<pb n='cv'/><anchor id='Pgcv'/>
But because Athens abounded in noble writers, the acts of that
republic are celebrated throughout the whole world as most
glorious; and the gallantry of those heroes who performed
them, has had the good fortune to be thought as transcendent
as the eloquence of those who have described them.</q><note place='foot'>Atheniensium
res gestæ, sicuti ego existimo, satis amplæ magnificæque fuerunt
verùm aliquanto minores tamen, quàm famâ feruntur. Sed quia provenere ibi scriptorum
magna ingenia, per terrarum orbem Atheniensiam facta pro maximis celeorantur.
Ita eorum, quæ fecere, virtus tanta habetur, quantum eam verbis potuere
extollere præclara ingenia. Sallust. <hi rend='italic'>in Bell.
Catilin.</hi>&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
Sallust, though jealous enough of the glory the Romans had
acquired by a series of distinguished actions, with which their
history abounds, yet does justice in this passage to the Grecians,
by acknowledging, that their exploits were truly great
and illustrious, though somewhat inferior, in his opinion, to
their fame. What is then this foreign and borrowed lustre,
which the Athenian actions have derived from the eloquence
of their historians? It is, that the whole universe agrees in
looking upon them as the greatest and most glorious that ever
were performed: <hi rend='italic'>Per terrarum orbem Atheniensium facta</hi>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>pro maximis celebrantur</hi>. All nations, seduced and enchanted
as it were with the beauties of the Greek authors, think that
people's exploits superior to any thing that was ever done by
any other nation. This, according to Sallust, is the service
which the Greek authors have done the Athenians, by their
excellent manner of describing their actions; and very unhappy
it is for us, that our history, for want of similar assistance, has
left a thousand brilliant actions and fine sayings unrecorded,
which would have been put in the strongest light by the writers
of antiquity, and have done great honour to our country.
</p>

<p>
But, be this as it may, it must be confessed, that we are not
always to judge of the value of an action, or the merit of the
persons who shared in it, by the importance of the event. It
is rather in such sieges and engagements as we find recorded
in the history of the Peloponnesian war, that the conduct and
abilities of a general are truly conspicuous. Accordingly, it is
observed, that it was chiefly at the head of small armies, and
in countries of no great extent, that our best generals of the
last age displayed their great capacity, and showed themselves
not inferior to the most celebrated captains of antiquity. In
actions of this sort chance has no share, and does not cover
any oversights that are committed. Every thing is conducted
and carried on by the prudence of the general. He is truly the
soul of the forces, which neither act nor move but by his direction.
He sees every thing, and is present every where. Nothing
escapes his vigilance and attention. Orders are seasonably
given, and seasonably executed. Contrivances, stratagems,
false marches, real or feigned attacks, encampments, decampments;
in a word, every thing depends upon him alone.
</p>

<p>
On this account, the reading of the Greek historians, such
<pb n='cvi'/><anchor id='Pgcvi'/>
as Thucydides, Xenophon, and Polybius, is of infinite service
to young officers; because those historians, who were also
excellent commanders, enter into all the particulars of the
events which they relate, and lead the readers, as it were by
the hand, through all the sieges and battles they describe;
showing them, by the example of the greatest generals of antiquity,
and by a kind of anticipated experience, in what manner
war is to be carried on.
</p>

<p>
Nor is it only with regard to military exploits, that the
Grecian history affords us such excellent models. We shall
there find celebrated legislators, able politicians, magistrates
born for government, men that have excelled in all arts and
sciences, philosophers that carried their inquiries as far as was
possible in those early ages, and who have left us such maxims
of morality, as might put many Christians to the blush.
</p>

<p>
If the virtues of those who are celebrated in history may
serve us for models in the conduct of our lives; their vices and
failings, on the other hand, are no less proper to caution and
instruct us; and the strict regard which an historian is obliged
to pay to truth will not allow him to dissemble the latter,
through fear of eclipsing the lustre of the former. Nor does
what I here advance contradict the rule laid down by Plutarch,
on the same subject, in his preface to the life of
<hi rend='italic'>Cimon</hi>.<note place='foot'>In <hi rend='italic'>Cim.</hi>
p. 479, 480.</note> He
requires, that the illustrious actions of great men be represented
in their full light; but as to the faults, which may sometimes
escape them through passion or surprise, or into which they
may be drawn by the necessity of affairs, considering them
rather as a certain degree of perfection wanting to their
virtue,<note place='foot'>Ἐλλείμματα μᾶλλον ἀρετῆς τινος ἢ κακίας
πόνηρεύματα.&mdash;Trans.</note>
than as vices or crimes that proceed from any corruption of
the heart; such imperfections as these, he would have the historian,
out of compassion to the weakness of human nature,
which produces nothing entirely perfect, content himself with
touching very lightly; in the same manner as an able painter,
when he has a fine face to draw, in which he finds some little
blemish or defect, does neither entirely suppress it, nor think
himself obliged to represent it with a strict exactness, because
the one would spoil the beauty of the picture, and the other
would destroy the likeness. The very comparison Plutarch
uses, shows, that he speaks only of slight and excusable faults.
But as to actions of injustice, violence, and brutality, they
ought not to be concealed or disguised on any pretence; nor
can we suppose, that the same privilege should be allowed in
<pb n='cvii'/><anchor id='Pgcvii'/>
history as is in painting, which invented the profile, to represent
the side-face of a prince who had lost an eye, and by that
means ingeniously concealed so disagreeable a deformity.<note place='foot'>Habet in
picturâ speciem tota facies. Apelles tamen imaginem Antigoni latere
tantùm altero ostendit, ut amissi oculi deformitas lateret. Quintil. l. ii. c.
13.&mdash;Trans.</note>
History, the most essential rule of which is sincerity, will by no
means admit of such indulgences, as indeed would deprive it of
its greatest advantage.
</p>

<p>
Shame, reproach, infamy, hatred, and the execrations of the
public, which are the inseparable attendants on criminal and
brutal actions, are no less proper to excite a horror for vice,
than the glory, which perpetually attends good actions, is to
inspire us with the love of virtue. And these, according to
Tacitus, are the two ends which every historian ought to propose
to himself, by making a judicious choice of what is most
extraordinary both in good and evil, in order to occasion that
public homage to be paid to virtue, which is justly due to it,
and to create the greater abhorrence for vice, on account of
that eternal infamy that attends it.<note place='foot'>Exequi sententias
haud institui, nisi insignes per honestum, aut notabili dedecore:
quod præcipuum munus annalium reor, ne virtutes sileantur, utque pravis
dictis factisque ex posteritate et infamiâ motus sit. Tacit.
<hi rend='italic'>Annal.</hi> l. iii. c. 65.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
The history which I am writing furnishes but too many
examples of the latter sort. With respect to the Persians, it
will appear, by what is said of their kings, that those princes,
whose power has no other bounds than those of their will, often
abandon themselves to all their passions; that nothing is more
difficult than to resist the illusions of a man's own greatness,
and the flatteries of those that surround him; that the liberty
of gratifying all one's desires, and of doing evil with impunity,
is a dangerous situation; that the best dispositions can hardly
withstand such a temptation; that even after having begun
their career favourably, they are insensibly corrupted by softness
and effeminacy, by pride, and their aversion to sincere
counsels; and that it rarely happens they are wise enough to
consider, that, when they find themselves exalted above all
laws and restraints, they stand then most in need of moderation
and wisdom, both in regard to themselves and others; and
that in such a situation they ought to be doubly wise, and
doubly strong, in order to set bounds within, by their reason,
to a power that has none without.
</p>

<p>
With respect to the Grecians, the Peloponnesian war will
show the miserable effects of their intestine divisions, and the
fatal excesses into which they were led by their thirst of
dominion: scenes of injustice, ingratitude, and perfidy, together
<pb n='cviii'/><anchor id='Pgcviii'/>
with the open violation of treaties, or mean artifices and
unworthy tricks to elude their execution. It will show, how
scandalously the Lacedæmonians and Athenians debased
themselves to the barbarians, in order to beg aids of money
from them: how shamefully the great deliverers of Greece
renounced the glory of all their past labours and exploits, by
stooping and making their court to haughty and insolent
satrapæ, and by going successively, with a kind of emulation,
to implore the protection of the common enemy, whom they
had so often conquered; and in what manner they employed
the succours they obtained from them, in oppressing their
ancient allies, and extending their own territories by unjust and
violent methods.
</p>

<p>
On both sides, and sometimes in the same person, we shall
find a surprising mixture of good and bad, of virtues and vices,
of glorious actions and mean sentiments; and sometimes,
perhaps, we shall be ready to ask ourselves, whether these can
be the same persons and the same people, of whom such different
things are related: and whether it be possible, that such
a bright and shining light, and such thick clouds of smoke and
darkness, can proceed from the same source?
</p>

<p>
The Persian history includes the space of one hundred and
seventeen years, during the reigns of six kings of Persia:
Darius, the first of the name, the son of Hystaspes; Xerxes
the first; Artaxerxes, surnamed Longimanus; Xerxes the
second; Sogdianus (these two last reigned but a very little
time); and Darius the second, commonly called Darius
Nothus. This history begins at the year of the world 3483,
and extends to the year 3600. As this whole period naturally
divides itself into two parts, I shall also divide it into two
distinct books.
</p>

<p>
The first part, which consists of ninety years, extends from
the beginning of the reign of Darius the first, to the forty-second
year of Artaxerxes, the same year in which the Peloponnesian
war began; that is, from the year of the world
3483, to the year 3573. This part chiefly contains the different
enterprises and expeditions of the Persians against
Greece, which never produced more great men and great
events, nor ever displayed more conspicuous or more solid
virtues. Here will be seen the famous battles of Marathon,
Thermopylæ, Artemisium, Salamis, Platææ, Mycale, Eurymedon,
&amp;c. Here the most eminent commanders of Greece
signalized their courage; Miltiades, Leonidas, Themistocles,
Aristides, Cimon, Pausanias, Pericles, Thucydides, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
To enable the reader the more easily to recollect what passed
<pb n='cix'/><anchor id='Pgcix'/>
within this space of time among the Jews, and also among the
Romans, the history of both which nations is entirely foreign
to that of the Persians and Greeks, I shall here set down in
few words the principal epochas relating to them.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<head>Epochas of the Jewish History.</head>

<p>
The people of God were at this time returned from their
Babylonish captivity to Jerusalem, under the conduct of Zorobabel.
Usher is of opinion, that the history of Esther ought
to be placed in the reign of Darius. The Israelites, under the
shadow of this prince's protection, and animated by the earnest
exhortations of the prophets Haggai and Zechariah, did at last
finish the building of the temple, which had been interrupted
for many years by the cabals of their enemies. Artaxerxes
was no less favourable to the Jews than Darius: he first of all
sent Ezra to Jerusalem, who restored the public worship, and
the observation of the law; then Nehemiah, who caused walls
to be built round the city, and fortified it against the attacks
of their neighbours, who were jealous of its reviving greatness.
It is thought that Malachi, the last of the prophets, was contemporary
with Nehemiah, or that he prophesied not long
after him.
</p>

<p>
This interval of the sacred history extends from the reign of
Darius I. to the beginning of the reign of Darius Nothus;
that is to say, from the year of the world 3485, to the year 3581.
After which the Scripture is entirely silent, till the time of the
Maccabees.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Epochas of the Roman History.</head>

<p>
The first year of Darius I. was the 233d of the building of
Rome. Tarquin the Proud was then on the throne, and about
ten years afterwards was expelled, when the consular government
was substituted to that of the kings. In the succeeding
part of this period happened the war against Porsenna; the
creation of the tribunes of the people; Coriolanus's retreat
among the Volsci, and the war that ensued thereupon; the
wars of the Romans against the Latins, the Veientes, the
Volsci, and other neighbouring nations; the death of Virginia
under the Decemvirate; the disputes between the people
and senate about marriages and the consulship, which occasioned
the creating of military tribunes instead of consuls.
<pb n='cx'/><anchor id='Pgcx'/>
This period of time terminates in the 323d year from the
foundation of Rome.
</p>

<p>
The second part, which consists of twenty-seven years, extends
from the 43d year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, to the death
of Darius Nothus; that is, from the year of the world 3573, to
the year 3600. It contains the first nineteen years of the
Peloponnesian war, which continued twenty-seven, of which
Greece and Sicily were the seat, and wherein the Greeks, who
had before triumphed over the barbarians, turned their arms
against each other. Among the Athenians, Pericles, Nicias,
and Alcibiades; among the Lacedæmonians, Brasidas, Gylippus,
and Lysander, distinguished themselves in the most extraordinary
manner.
</p>

<p>
Rome continues to be agitated by different disputes between
the senate and the people. Towards the end of this period,
and about the 350th year of Rome, the Romans formed the
siege of Veji, which lasted ten years.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2900. Ant. J.C. 1104.</note>
I have already observed, that eighty years after the taking
of Troy, the Heraclidæ, that is, the descendants of
Hercules, returned into the Peloponnesus, and made
themselves masters of Lacedæmon, where two brothers,
Eurysthenes and Procles, sons of Aristodemus, reigned
jointly together.
</p>

<p>
Herodotus observes,<note place='foot'>Lib. vi. c. 52.</note>
that these two brothers were, during
their whole lives, at variance; and that almost all their descendants
inherited the like disposition of mutual hatred and
antipathy; so true it is, that the sovereign power will admit of
no partnership, and that two kings will always be too many for
one kingdom! However, after the death of these two, the
descendants of both still continued to sway the sceptre jointly:
and, what is very remarkable, these two branches subsisted for
near nine hundred years, from the return of the Heraclidæ into
the Peloponnesus, to the death of Cleomenes, and supplied
Sparta with kings without interruption, and that generally in a
regular succession from father to son, especially in the elder
branch of the family.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Origin and Condition of the Elotæ, or Helots.</head>

<p>
When the Lacedæmonians first began to settle in Peloponnesus,
they met with great opposition from the inhabitants of
the country, whom they were obliged to subdue one after another
by force of arms, or receive into their alliance on easy
<pb n='cxi'/><anchor id='Pgcxi'/>
and equitable terms, with the imposition of a small tribute.
Strabo<note place='foot'>Lib. viii. p. 365. Plut. <hi rend='italic'>in
Lycurg.</hi> p. 40.</note> speaks of a city, called Elos, not far from Sparta,
which, after having submitted to the yoke, as others had done,
revolted openly, and refused to pay the tribute. Agis, the son
of Eurysthenes, newly settled in the throne, was sensible of the
dangerous tendency of this first revolt, and therefore immediately
marched with an army against them, together with
Soüs, his colleague. They laid siege to the city, which, after
a pretty long resistance, was forced to surrender at discretion.
This prince thought it proper to make such an example of
them as should intimidate all their neighbours, and deter them
from the like attempts, and yet not alienate their minds by too
cruel a treatment; for which reason he put none to death. He
spared the lives of all the inhabitants, but at the same time
deprived them of their liberty, and reduced them all to a state
of slavery. From thenceforward they were employed in all
mean and servile offices, and treated with extreme rigour.
These were the people who were called Elotæ, or Helots. The
number of them exceedingly increased in process of time, the
Lacedæmonians giving undoubtedly the same name to all the
people whom they reduced to the same condition of servitude.
As they themselves were averse to labour, and entirely addicted
to war, they left the cultivation of their lands to these slaves,
assigning every one of them a certain portion of ground, the
produce of which they were obliged to carry every year to their
respective masters, who endeavoured, by all sorts of ill usage,
to make their yoke more grievous and insupportable. This
was certainly very bad policy, and could only tend to breed a
vast number of dangerous enemies in the very heart of the
state, who were always ready to take arms and revolt on every
occasion. The Romans acted more prudently; for they incorporated
the conquered nations into their state, by associating
them into the freedom of their city, and thereby converted them
from enemies, into brethren and fellow-citizens.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Lycurgus, the Lacedæmonian Lawgiver</head>

<p>
Eurytion, or Eurypon, as he is named by others, succeeded
Soüs.<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>in Lycurg.</hi>
p. 40.</note> In order to gain the affection of his people, and render
his government agreeable, he thought fit to recede in some
points from the absolute power exercised by the kings his
predecessors: this rendered his name so dear to his subjects,
<pb n='cxii'/><anchor id='Pgcxii'/>
that all his descendants were, from him, called Eurytionidæ.
But this relaxation gave birth to horrible confusion, and an
unbounded licentiousness in Sparta; and for a long time occasioned
infinite mischiefs. The people became so insolent, that
nothing could restrain them. If Eurytion's successors attempted
to recover their authority by force, they became
odious; and if, through complaisance or weakness, they chose
to dissemble, their mildness served only to render them contemptible;
so that order in a manner was abolished, and the
laws no longer regarded. These confusions hastened the death
of Lycurgus's father, whose name was Eunomus, and who
was killed in an insurrection. Polydectes, his eldest son and
successor, dying soon after without children, every body expected
Lycurgus would have been king. And indeed he was
so in effect, as long as the pregnancy of his brother's wife was
uncertain; but as soon as that was manifest, he declared, that
the kingdom belonged to her child, in case it proved a son:
and from that moment he took upon himself the administration
of the government, as guardian to his unborn nephew, under
the title of Prodicos, which was the name given by the Lacedæmonians
to the guardians of their kings. When the child
was born, Lycurgus took him in his arms, and cried out to the
company that was present, <emph>Behold, my lords of Sparta, your
new-born king!</emph> and, at the same time, he put the infant into
the king's seat, and named him Charilaus, because of the joy
the people expressed upon occasion of his birth. The reader
will find, in the second volume of this history, all that relates
to the history of Lycurgus, the reformation he made, and the
excellent laws he established in Sparta. Agesilaus was at this
time king in the elder branch of the family.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>War between the Argives and the Lacedæmonians.</head>

<p>
Some time after this, in the reign of Theopompus, a war
broke out between the Argives and Lacedæmonians, on account
of a little country, called Thyrea, that lay upon the confines of
the two states, and to which each of them pretended a right.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. i. c. 82.</note>
When the two armies were ready to engage, it was agreed on
both sides, in order to spare the effusion of blood, that the
quarrel should be decided by three hundred of the bravest men
chosen from their respective armies; and that the land in
question should become the property of the victorious party.
To leave the combatants more room to engage, the two armies
<pb n='cxiii'/><anchor id='Pgcxiii'/>
retired to some distance. Those generous champions then,
who had all the courage of two mighty armies, boldly advanced
towards each other, and fought with so much resolution and
fury, that the whole number, except three men, two on the side
of the Argives, and one on that of the Lacedæmonians, lay
dead upon the spot; and only the night parted them. The
two Argives, looking upon themselves as the conquerors, made
what haste they could to Argos to carry the news; the single
Lacedæmonian, Othryades by name, instead of retiring, stripped
the dead bodies of the Argives, and carrying their arms into
the Lacedæmonian camp, continued in his post. The next
day the two armies returned to the field of battle. Both sides
laid equal claim to the victory: the Argives, because they had
more of their champions left alive than the enemy had; the
Lacedæmonians, because the two Argives that remained alive
had fled; whereas their single soldier had remained master of
the field of battle, and had carried off the spoils of the enemy:
in short, they could not determine the dispute without coming
to another engagement. Here fortune declared in favour of
the Lacedæmonians, and the little territory of Thyrea was the
prize of their victory. But Othryades, not able to bear the
thoughts of surviving his brave companions, or of enduring the
sight of Sparta after their death, killed himself on the same
field of battle where they had fought, resolving to have one
fate and tomb with them.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Wars between the Messenians and Lacedæmonians.</head>

<p>
There were no less than three several wars between the
Messenians and the Lacedæmonians, all of them very fierce
and bloody. Messenia was a country in Peloponnesus, towards
the west, and not far from Sparta: it was of considerable
strength, and was governed by its own kings.
</p>

<div>
<head>The First Messenian War.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3261. Ant. J.C. 743.</note>
The first Messenian war lasted twenty years, and broke out
the second year of the ninth Olympiad.<note place='foot'>Pausan.
l. iv. p. 216-242. Justin, l. iii. c. 4.</note> The Lacedæmonians
pretended to have received several considerable
injuries from the Messenians, and among
others, that of having had their daughters ravished by the
inhabitants of Messenia, when they went, according to custom,
to a temple, that stood on the borders of the two nations;
as also that of the murder of Telecles, their king, which was
<pb n='cxiv'/><anchor id='Pgcxiv'/>
a consequence of the former outrage. Probably a desire of
extending their dominion, and of seizing a territory which lay
so convenient for them, might be the true cause of the war.
But be that as it may, the war broke out in the reign of Polydorus
and Theopompus, kings of Sparta, at the time when the
office of archon at Athens was still decennial.
</p>

<p>
Euphaes, the thirteenth descendant from Hercules, was
then king of Messenia.<note place='foot'>Pausan. l. iv.
p. 225, 226.</note> He gave the command of his army to
Cleonnis. The Lacedæmonians opened the campaign with the
siege of Amphea, a small, inconsiderable city, which, however,
they thought would suit them very well as a place for military
stores. The town was taken by storm, and all the inhabitants
put to the sword. This first blow served only to animate the
Messenians, by showing them what they were to expect from
the enemy, if they did not defend themselves with vigour. The
Lacedæmonians, on their part, bound themselves by an oath not
to lay down their arms, nor to return to Sparta, till they had made
themselves masters of all the cities and lands belonging to the
Messenians: so much did they rely upon their strength and
valour.
</p>

<p>
Two battles were fought, wherein the loss was nearly equal
on both sides.<note place='foot'>Ibid. l. iv. 227-234.</note>
But after the second, the Messenians suffered
extremely through the want of provisions, which occasioned a
great desertion in their troops, and at last brought a pestilence
among them.
</p>

<p>
Hereupon they consulted the oracle of Delphi, which
directed them, in order to appease the wrath of the gods, to
offer up a virgin of the royal blood in sacrifice. Aristomenes,
who was of the race of the Epytides, offered his own daughter.
The Messenians then considering, that if they left garrisons in
all their towns they should extremely weaken their army, resolved
to abandon them all, except Ithome, a little place seated
on the top of a hill of the same name, about which they encamped
and fortified themselves. In this situation were seven
years spent, during which nothing passed but slight skirmishes
on both sides; the Lacedæmonians not daring in all that time
to force the enemy to a battle.
</p>

<p>
Indeed, they almost despaired of being able to reduce them:
nor was there any thing but the obligation of the oath, by
which they had bound themselves, that made them continue
so burthensome a war. What gave them the greatest uneasiness
was, their apprehension, lest their absence from their
<pb n='cxv'/><anchor id='Pgcxv'/>
wives for so many years, an absence which might still continue
many more, should destroy their families at home, and leave
Sparta destitute of citizens.<note place='foot'>Diod. l. xv.
p. 378.</note> To prevent this misfortune, they
sent home such of their soldiers as were come to the army since
the forementioned oath had been taken, and made no scruple
of prostituting their wives to their embraces. The children that
sprung from this unlawful intercourse were called Partheniæ,
a name given them to denote the infamy of their birth. As
soon as they were grown up, not being able to endure such an
opprobrious distinction, they banished themselves from Sparta
with one consent, and, under the conduct of Phalantus, went
and settled at Tarentum in Italy, after driving out the ancient
inhabitants.<note place='foot'>Et regnata petam Laconi rura Phalanto.
Hor. <hi rend='italic'>Od.</hi> vi. l. 2.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
At last, in the eighth year of the war, which was the thirteenth
of Euphaes's reign, a fierce and bloody battle was fought
near Ithome.<note place='foot'>Pausan. l. iv. p. 234, 235.
Diod. <hi rend='italic'>in Frag.</hi></note>
Euphaes pierced through the battalions of
Theopompus with too much heat and precipitation for a king.
He there received a multitude of wounds, several of which
were mortal. He fell, and seemed to give up the ghost.
Whereupon, wonderful efforts of courage were exerted on both
sides; by the one, to carry off the king; by the other, to save
him. Cleonnis killed eight Spartans, who were dragging him
along, and spoiled them of their arms, which he committed to
the custody of some of his soldiers. He himself received several
wounds, all in the fore part of his body, which was a certain
proof that he had never turned his back upon his enemies.
Aristomenes, fighting on the same occasion, and for the same
end, killed five Lacedæmonians, whose spoils he likewise carried
off, without receiving any wound. In short, the king was
saved and carried off by the Messenians; and, all mangled
and bloody as he was, he expressed great joy that he had not
been worsted. Aristomenes, after the battle was over, met
Cleonnis, who, by reason of his wounds, could neither walk by
himself, nor with the assistance of those that lent him their
hands. He therefore took him upon his shoulders, without
quitting his arms, and carried him to the camp.
</p>

<p>
As soon as they had applied the first dressing to the wounds
of the king of Messenia and of his officers, there arose a new
contention among the Messenians, that was pursued with as
much warmth as the former, but was of a very different kind,
and yet the consequence of the other. The affair in question
was the adjudging the prize of glory to him that had signalized
<pb n='cxvi'/><anchor id='Pgcxvi'/>
his valour most in the late engagement. It was a custom
among them, which had long been established, publicly to proclaim,
after a battle, the name of the man that had showed the
greatest courage. Nothing could be more proper to animate
the officers and soldiers, to inspire them with resolution and
intrepidity, and to stifle the natural apprehension of death and
danger. Two illustrious champions entered the lists on this
occasion, namely, Cleonnis and Aristomenes.
</p>

<p>
The king, notwithstanding his weak condition, attended by
the principal officers of his army, presided in the council,
where this important dispute was to be decided. Each competitor
pleaded his own cause. Cleonnis founded his pretensions
upon the great number of the enemies he had slain, and
upon the multitude of wounds he had received in the action,
which were so many undoubted testimonies of the courage with
which he had faced both death and danger; whereas, the condition
in which Aristomenes came out of the engagement, without
hurt and without wound, seemed to show, that he had been
very careful of his own person, or, at most, could only prove
that he had been more fortunate, but not more brave or courageous,
than himself. And as to his having carried him on
his shoulders into the camp, that action indeed might serve
to prove the strength of his body, but nothing farther; and
the thing in dispute at this time, says he, is not strength, but
valour.
</p>

<p>
The only thing Aristomenes was reproached for, was his not
being wounded; therefore he confined himself to that point:
<q>I am,</q> says he, <q>called fortunate because I have escaped
from the battle without wounds. If that were owing to my
cowardice, I should deserve another epithet than that of fortunate;
and, instead of being admitted to dispute the prize, ought
to undergo the rigour of the laws that punish cowards. But
what is objected to me as a crime, is in truth my greatest glory.
For, if my enemies, astonished at my valour, durst not venture
to attack or oppose me, it is no small degree of merit that I
made them fear me; or, if whilst they engaged me, I had at
the same time strength to cut them in pieces, and skill to
guard against their attacks, I must then have been at once both
valiant and prudent. For whoever, in the midst of an engagement,
can expose himself to dangers with caution and security,
shows that he excels at the same time both in the virtues of
the mind and the body. As for courage, no man living can
reproach Cleonnis with any want of it; but, for his honour's
sake, I am sorry that he should appear to want gratitude.</q>
</p>

<p>
After the conclusion of these harangues, the question was
<pb n='cxvii'/><anchor id='Pgcxvii'/>
put to the vote. The whole army is in suspense, and impatiently
waits for the decision. No dispute could be so warm and
interesting as this. It is not a competition for gold or silver,
but solely for honour. The proper reward of virtue is pure
disinterested glory. Here the judges are unsuspected. The
actions of the competitors still speak for them. It is the king
himself, surrounded with his officers, who presides and adjudges.
A whole army are the witnesses. The field of battle
is a tribunal without partiality and cabal. In short, all the
votes concurred in favour of Aristomenes, and adjudged him
the prize.
</p>

<p>
Euphaes died not many days after the decision of this
affair.<note place='foot'>Pausan. l. iv. p. 235, 241.</note>
He had reigned thirteen years, and during all that time
had been engaged in war with the Lacedæmonians. As he
died without children, he left the Messenians at liberty to
choose his successor. Cleonnis and Damis were candidates in
opposition to Aristomenes; but he was elected king in preference
to them. When he was on the throne, he did not scruple
to confer on his two rivals the principal offices of the state; all
strongly attached to the public good, even more than to their
own glory; competitors, but not enemies, these great men
were actuated by a zeal for their country, and were neither
friends nor adversaries to one another, but for its preservation.
</p>

<p>
In this relation, I have followed the opinion of the late
Monsieur Boivin, the elder,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Memoirs
of the Academy of Inscriptions</hi>, vol. ii. p. 84-113.&mdash;Trans.</note>
and have made use of his learned
dissertation upon a fragment of Diodorus Siculus, which the
world was little acquainted with. He supposes, and proves in
it, that the king, spoken of in that fragment, is Euphaes; and
that Aristomenes is the same that Pausanias calls Aristodemus,
according to the custom of the ancients, who were often called
by two different names.
</p>

<p>
Aristomenes, otherwise called Aristodemus, reigned near
seven years, and was equally esteemed and beloved by his subjects.
The war still continued all this time.<note place='foot'>Clem. Alex.
<hi rend='italic'>in Protrep.</hi> p. 20. Euseb. <hi rend='italic'>in
Prœp.</hi> l. iv. c. 16.</note> Towards the
end of his reign he beat the Lacedæmonians, took their king
Theopompus, and, in honour of Jupiter of Ithome, sacrificed
three hundred of them, among whom their king was the principal
victim. Shortly after, Aristodemus sacrificed himself
upon the tomb of his daughter, in conformity to the answer of
an oracle. Damis was his successor, but without taking upon
him the title of king.
</p>

<pb n='cxviii'/><anchor id='Pgcxviii'/>

<p>
After his death, the Messenians never had any success in
their affairs, but found themselves in a very wretched and
hopeless condition.<note place='foot'>Pausan. l. iv. p.
241-242.</note> Being reduced to the last extremity, and
utterly destitute of provisions, they abandoned Ithome, and
fled to such of their allies as were nearest to them. The city
was immediately razed, and the other part of the country submitted.
They were made to engage by oath never to forsake
the party of the Lacedæmonians, and never to revolt from
them: a very useless precaution, only proper to make them
add the guilt of perjury to their rebellion. Their new masters
imposed no tribute upon them; but contented themselves with
obliging them to bring to the Spartan market one half of the
corn they should reap every harvest. It was likewise stipulated,
that the Messenians, both men and women, should
attend, in mourning, the funerals of the kings and chief citizens
of Sparta; which the Lacedæmonians probably looked upon
as a mark of dependence, and as a kind of homage
paid to their nation.
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3281. Ant. J.C. 723.</note>
Thus ended the first Messenian
war, after having lasted twenty years.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Second Messenian War.</head>

<p>
The lenity with which the Lacedæmonians treated the
Messenians at first, was of no long duration.<note place='foot'>Ibid.
p. 242, 261. Justin, l. iii. c. 5.</note> When once they
found the whole country had submitted, and thought the people
incapable of giving them any further trouble, they returned
to their natural character of insolence and haughtiness, that
often degenerated into cruelty, and sometimes even into ferocity.
Instead of treating the vanquished with kindness, as
friends and allies, and endeavouring by gentle methods to win
those whom they had subdued by force, they seemed intent
upon nothing but aggravating their yoke, and making them feel
the whole weight of subjection. They laid heavy taxes upon
them, delivered them up to the avarice of the collectors of those
taxes, gave no ear to their complaints, rendered them no justice,
treated them with contempt like vile slaves, and committed
the most heinous outrages against them.
</p>

<p>
Man, who is born for liberty, can never reconcile himself to
servitude: the most gentle slavery exasperates, and provokes
him to rebel. What could be expected then from so cruel a
one, as that under which the Messenians groaned? After
<pb n='cxix'/><anchor id='Pgcxix'/>
having endured it with great uneasiness<note place='foot'>Cùm per
complures annos gravia servitutis verbera, plerumque ac vincula,
cæteraque captivitatis mala perpessi essent, post longam pænarum patientiam
bellum instaurant. Justin, l. iii. c. 5.&mdash;Trans.</note> near forty years, they
resolved to throw off the yoke, and to recover their ancient
liberty.
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3320. Ant. J.C. 684.</note>
This was in the fourth year of the twenty-third
Olympiad: the office of archon at Athens was then
made annual; and Anaxander and Anaxidamus
reigned at Sparta.
</p>

<p>
The Messenians' first care was to strengthen themselves by
the alliance of the neighbouring nations. These they found
well inclined to enter into their views, as very agreeable to their
own interests. For it was not without jealousy and apprehensions,
that they saw so powerful a city rising up in the midst
of them, which manifestly seemed to aim at extending her
dominion over all the rest. The people therefore of Elis, the
Argives and Sicyonians, declared for the Messenians. But
before their forces were joined, a battle was fought between the
Lacedæmonians and Messenians. Aristomenes, the second
of that name,<note place='foot'>According to several historians,
there was another Aristomenes in the first Messenian war.
Diod. l. xv. p. 378.&mdash;Trans.</note>
was at the head of the latter. He was a commander
of intrepid courage, and of great abilities in war. The
Lacedæmonians were beaten in this engagement. Aristomenes,
to give the enemy at first an advantageous opinion of his bravery,
knowing what influence it has on the success of future
enterprises, boldly ventured to enter into Sparta by night, and
upon the gate of the temple of Minerva, surnamed Chalcioecos,
to hang up a shield, on which was an inscription, signifying,
that it was a present offered by Aristomenes to the goddess,
out of the spoils of the Lacedæmonians.
</p>

<p>
This bravado did in reality astonish the Lacedæmonians.
But they were still more alarmed at the formidable league that
was formed against them. The Delphic oracle, which they
consulted, in order to know by what means they should be
successful in this war, directed them to send to Athens for a
commander, and to submit to his counsel and conduct. This
was a very mortifying step to so haughty a city as Sparta. But
the fear of incurring the god's displeasure by a direct disobedience
prevailed over all other considerations. They sent
an embassy therefore to the Athenians. The people of Athens
were somewhat perplexed at the request. On the one hand,
they were not sorry to see the Lacedæmonians at war with
their neighbours, and were far from desiring to furnish them
with a good general: on the other, they were afraid also of
<pb n='cxx'/><anchor id='Pgcxx'/>
disobeying the god. To extricate themselves out of this difficulty,
they offered the Lacedæmonians Tyrtæus. He was a
poet by profession, and had something original in the turn of
his mind, and disagreeable in his person; for he was lame.
Notwithstanding these defects, the Lacedæmonians received
him as a general, sent them by Heaven itself. Their success
did not at first answer their expectation, for they lost three
battles successively.
</p>

<p>
The kings of Sparta, discouraged by so many disappointments,
and out of all hopes of better success for the future,
were absolutely bent upon returning to Sparta, and marching
home again with their forces. Tyrtæus opposed this design
very warmly, and at length brought them over to his opinion.
He addressed the troops, and repeated to them some verses he
had made with that intention, and on which he had bestowed
great pains and application. He first endeavoured to comfort
them for their past losses, which he imputed to no fault of
theirs, but only to ill fortune, or to fate, which no human wisdom
can surmount. He then represented to them, how shameful
it would be for Spartans to fly from an enemy; and how
glorious it would be for them rather to perish sword in hand, if
it was so decreed by fate, in fighting for their country. Then,
as if all danger was vanished, and the gods, fully satisfied and
appeased with their late calamities, were entirely turned to
their side, he set victory before their eyes as present and certain,
and as if she herself were inviting them to battle. All
the ancient authors,<note place='foot'>Plat. l. i. <hi rend='italic'>de
Legib.</hi> p. 629. Plut. <hi rend='italic'>in Agid. et Cleom.</hi>
p. 805.</note> who have made any mention of the style
and character of Tyrtæus's poetry, observe, that it was full of
a certain fire, ardour, and enthusiasm, that inflamed the minds
of men, that exalted them above themselves, that inspired
them with something generous and martial, that extinguished
all fear and apprehension of danger or death, and made them
wholly intent upon the preservation of their country and their
own glory.<note place='foot'><p>Tyrtæusque mares animos in martia bella<lb/>
Versibus exacuit.
</p>
<p>
Hor. <hi rend='italic'>in Art. Poët.</hi>&mdash;Trans.</p></note>
Tyrtæus's verses had really this effect on the soldiers upon
this occasion. They all desired, with one voice, to march
against the enemy. Being become indifferent as to their lives,
they had no thoughts but to secure themselves the honour of a
burial. To this end they all tied strings round their right arms,
on which were inscribed their own and their fathers' names,
that, if they chanced to be killed in the battle, and to have
<pb n='cxxi'/><anchor id='Pgcxxi'/>
their faces so altered through time, or accidents, as not to be
distinguishable, it might certainly be known who each of them
was by these marks. Soldiers determined to die are very
valiant. This appeared in the battle that ensued. It was very
bloody, the victory being a long time disputed on both sides;
but at last the Messenians gave way. When Tyrtæus went
afterwards to Sparta, he was received with the greatest marks
of distinction, and incorporated into the body of citizens.
</p>

<p>
The gaining of this battle did not put an end to the war,
which had already lasted three years. Aristomenes, having
assembled the remains of his army, retired to the top of a
mountain, of difficult access, which was called Ira. The conquerors
attempted to carry the place by assault, but that brave
prince defended himself there for the space of eleven years, and
performed the most extraordinary actions of valour. He was
at last obliged to quit it, only by surprise and treachery, after
having defended it like a lion. Such of the Messenians as fell
into the hands of the Lacedæmonians on this occasion were
reduced to the condition of the Helots. The rest, seeing their
country ruined, went and settled at Zancle, a city in Sicily,
which afterwards took its name from this people, and was called
Messana; the same place as is called at this day Messina.
Aristomenes, after having conducted one of his daughters to
Rhodes, whom he had given in marriage to the tyrant of that
place, thought of passing on to Sardis, to remain with Ardys,
king of the Lydians, or to Ecbatana, with Phraortes, king of
the Medes; but death prevented the execution of all his designs.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3334. Ant. J.C. 670.</note>
The second Messenian war was of fourteen years'
duration, and ended the first year of the twenty-seventh
Olympiad.
</p>

<p>
There was a third war between these people and the Lacedæmonians,
which began both at the time and on the occasion
of a great earthquake that happened at Sparta. We shall
speak of this war in its place.
</p>

<p>
The history, of which it remains for me to treat in this work,
is that of the successors of Alexander, and comprehends the
space of two hundred and ninety-three years; from the death
of that monarch, and the commencement of the reign of
Ptolemy, the son of Lagus, in Egypt, to the death of Cleopatra,
when that kingdom became a Roman province, under the
emperor Augustus.
</p>

<p>
The history will present to our view a series of all the crimes
which usually arise from inordinate ambition; scenes of jealousy
and perfidy, treason, ingratitude, and flagrant abuses of
<pb n='cxxii'/><anchor id='Pgcxxii'/>
sovereign power; cruelty, impiety, an utter oblivion of the
natural sentiments of probity and honour, with the violation of
all laws human and divine, will rise before us. We shall behold
nothing but fatal dissensions, destructive wars, and dreadful
revolutions. Men, originally friends, brought up together,
and natives of the same country, companions in the same
dangers, and instruments in the accomplishment of the same
exploits and victories, will conspire to tear in pieces the empire
they had all concurred to form at the expense of their blood.
We shall see the captains of Alexander sacrifice the mother,
the wives, the brother, the sisters, of that prince, to their own
ambition; without sparing even those to whom they themselves
either owed or gave life. We shall no longer behold those
glorious times of Greece, that were once so productive of great
men and great examples; or, if we should happen to discover
some traces and remains of them, they will only resemble the
gleams of lightning that shoot along in a rapid track, and attract
attention only in consequence of the profound darkness
that precedes and follows them.
</p>

<p>
I acknowledge myself to be sufficiently sensible how much a
writer is to be pitied, for being obliged to represent human nature
in such colours and lineaments as dishonour her, and
which cannot fail of inspiring disgust and a secret affliction in
the minds of those who are made spectators of such a picture.
History loses whatever is most interesting and most capable of
conveying pleasure and instruction, when she can only produce
those effects, by inspiring the mind with horror for criminal
actions, and by a representation of the calamities which usually
succeed them, and are to be considered as their just punishment.
It is difficult to engage the attention of a reader, for any
considerable time, on objects which only raise his indignation,
and it would be affronting him, to seem desirous of dissuading
him from the excess of inordinate passions, of which he conceives
himself incapable.
</p>

<p>
How is it possible to diffuse any interest through a narration,
which has nothing to offer but an uniform series of vices and
great crimes; and which makes it necessary to enter into a
particular detail of the actions and characters of men born for
the calamity of the human race, and whose very name should
not be transmitted to posterity? It may even be thought dangerous,
to familiarize the minds of the generality of mankind
to uninterrupted scenes of too successful iniquity and to be
particular in describing the unjust success which waited on
those illustrious criminals, the long duration of whose prosperity
being frequently attended with the privileges and rewards
<pb n='cxxiii'/><anchor id='Pgcxxiii'/>
of virtue, may be thought an imputation on Providence by
persons of weak understandings.
</p>

<p>
This history, which seems likely to prove very disagreeable,
from the reasons I have just mentioned, will become more so
from the obscurity and confusion in which the several transactions
will be involved, and which it will be difficult, if not
impossible, to remedy. Ten or twelve of Alexander's captains
were engaged in a course of hostilities against each other, for
the partition of his empire after his death; and to secure to
themselves some portion, greater or less, of that vast body.
Sometimes feigned friends, sometimes declared enemies, they
are continually forming different parties and leagues, which
are to subsist no longer than is consistent with the interest of
each individual. Macedonia changed its master five or six
times in a very short space; by what means then can order
and perspicuity be preserved, in so prodigious a variety of
events that are perpetually crossing and breaking in upon each
other?
</p>

<p>
Besides which, I am no longer supported by any ancient
authors capable of conducting me through this darkness and
confusion. Diodorus will entirely abandon me, after having
been my guide for some time; and no other historian will
appear to take his place. No proper series of affairs will remain;
the several events are not to be disposed into any regular
connection with each other; nor will it be possible to point
out, either the motives to the resolutions formed, or the proper
character of the principal actors in this scene of obscurity. I
think myself happy when Polybius, or Plutarch, lend me their
assistance. In my account of Alexander's successors, whose
transactions are, perhaps, the most complicated and perplexed
part of ancient history, Usher, Prideaux, and Vaillant, will be
my usual guides; and, on many occasions, I shall only transcribe
from Prideaux; but, with all these aids, I shall not
promise to throw so much light upon this history as I could
desire.
</p>

<p>
After a war of more than twenty years, the number of the
principal competitors was reduced to four; Ptolemy, Cassander,
Seleucus, and Lysimachus; the empire of Alexander
was divided into four fixed kingdoms, agreeably to the prediction
of Daniel, by a solemn treaty concluded between the
parties. Three of these kingdoms, Egypt, Macedonia, Syria,
or Asia, will have a regular succession of monarchs, sufficiently
clear and distinct; but the fourth, which comprehended
Thrace, with part of the Lesser Asia, and some neighbouring
provinces, will suffer a number of variations.
</p>

<pb n='cxxiv'/><anchor id='Pgcxxiv'/>

<p>
As the kingdom of Egypt was that which was subject to the
fewest changes, because Ptolemy, who was established there as
governor, at the death of Alexander, retained the possession of
it ever after, and left it to his posterity: we shall, therefore,
consider this prince as the basis of our chronology, and our
several epochas shall be fixed from him.
</p>

<p>
The fourth volume contains the events for the space of one
hundred and twenty years, under the first four kings of Egypt,
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> Ptolemy, the son of Lagus, who reigned thirty-eight years;
Ptolemy Philadelphus, who reigned forty; Ptolemy Euergetes,
who reigned twenty-five; and Ptolemy Philopator, whose
reign continued seventeen.
</p>

<p>
In order to throw some light upon the history contained
therein, I shall, in the first place, give the principal events of
it, in a chronological abridgement.
</p>

<p>
Introductory to which, I must desire the reader to accompany
me in some reflections, which have not escaped Monsieur
Bossuet, with relation to Alexander. This prince, who was
the most renowned and illustrious conqueror in all history, was
the last monarch of his race. Macedonia, his ancient kingdom,
which his ancestors had governed for so many ages, was
invaded from all quarters, as a vacant succession; and after it
had long been a prey to the strongest, it was at last transferred
to another family. If Alexander had continued peaceably in
Macedonia, the grandeur of his empire would not have excited
the ambition of his captains; and he might have transmitted
the sceptre of his progenitors to his own descendants; but, as
he had not prescribed any bounds to his power, he was instrumental
in the destruction of his house, and we shall behold the
extermination of his family, without the least remaining traces
of them in history. His conquests occasioned a vast effusion
of blood, and furnished his captains with a pretext for murdering
one another. These were the effects that flowed from the
boasted bravery of Alexander, or rather from that brutality,
which, under the specious names of ambition and glory, spread
desolation, and carried fire and sword through whole provinces,
without the least provocation, and shed the blood of multitudes
who had never injured him.
</p>

<p>
We are not to imagine, however, that Providence abandoned
these events to chance; but, as it was then preparing all things
for the approaching appearance of the Messiah, it was vigilant
to unite all the nations that were to be first enlightened with
the Gospel, by the use of one and the same language, which
was that of Greece: and the same Providence made it necessary
for them to learn this foreign tongue, by subjecting them
<pb n='cxxv'/><anchor id='Pgcxxv'/>
to such masters as spoke no other. The Deity, therefore, by
the agency of this language, which became more common and
universal than any other, facilitated the preaching of the
apostles, and rendered it more uniform.
</p>

<p>
The partition of the empire of Alexander the Great, among
the generals of that prince, immediately after his death, did
not subsist for any length of time, and hardly took place, if we
except Egypt, where Ptolemy had first established himself,
and on the throne of which he always maintained himself
without acknowledging any superior.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3704. Ant. J.C. 300.</note>
It was not till after the battle of Ipsus in Phrygia, wherein
Antigonus, and his son Demetrius, surnamed Poliorcetes,
were defeated, and the former lost his life, that
this partition was fully regulated and fixed. The
empire of Alexander was then divided into four kingdoms, by
a solemn treaty, as had been foretold by Daniel. Ptolemy had
Egypt, Libya, Arabia, Cœlesyria, and Palestine. Cassander,
the son of Antipater, obtained Macedonia and Greece. Lysimachus
acquired Thrace, Bithynia, and some other provinces
on the other side of the Hellespont and the Bosphorus. And
Seleucus had Syria, and all that part of the greater Asia which
extended to the other side of the Euphrates, and as far as the
river Indus.
</p>

<p>
Of these four kingdoms, those of Egypt and Syria subsisted,
almost without any interruption, in the same families, through
a long succession of princes. The kingdom of Macedonia had
several masters of different families successively. That of
Thrace was at last divided into several branches, and no longer
constituted one entire body, by which means all traces of
regular succession ceased to subsist.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<head>I. The Kingdom of Egypt.</head>

<p>
The kingdom of Egypt had fourteen monarchs, including
Cleopatra, after whose death, those dominions became a province
of the Roman empire. All these princes had the common
name of Ptolemy, but each of them was likewise distinguished
by a peculiar surname. They had also the appellation
of Lagides, from Lagus the father of that Ptolemy who reigned
the first in Egypt. The fourth and fifth volumes contain the
histories of six of these kings, and I shall give their names a
place here, with the duration of their reigns, the first of which
commenced immediately upon the death of Alexander the
Great.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3680.</note> Ptolemy Soter. He reigned thirty-eight years and
some months.
</p>

<pb n='cxxvi'/><anchor id='Pgcxxvi'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3718.</note> Ptolemy Philadelphus. He reigned forty years
including the two years of his reign in the lifetime
of his father.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3758.</note> Ptolemy Euergetes, twenty-five years.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3783.</note> Ptolemy Philopator, seventeen.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3800.</note> Ptolemy Epiphanes, twenty-four.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3824.</note> Ptolemy Philometor, thirty-four.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>II. The Kingdom of Syria.</head>

<p>
The kingdom of Syria had twenty-seven kings; which makes
it evident, that their reigns were often very short: and indeed
several of these princes waded to the throne through the blood
of their predecessors.
</p>

<p>
They are usually called the Seleucidæ, from Seleucus, who
reigned the first in Syria. History reckons up six kings of this
name, and thirteen who are called by that of Antiochus; but
they are all distinguished by different surnames. Others of
them assumed different names, and the last, Antiochus XIII.,
was surnamed Epiphanes, Asiaticus, and Commagenus. In
his reign Pompey reduced Syria into a Roman province, after
it had been governed by kings for the space of two hundred
and fifty years, according to Eusebius.
</p>

<p>
The kings of Syria, the transactions of whose reigns are
contained in the fourth and fifth volumes, are eight in number.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3704.</note> Seleucus Nicator. He reigned twenty years.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3724.</note> Antiochus Soter, nineteen.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3743.</note> Antiochus Theos, fifteen.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3758.</note> Seleucus Callinicus, twenty.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3778.</note> Seleucus Ceraunus, three.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3781.</note> Antiochus the Great, thirty-six.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3817.</note> Seleucus Philopator, twelve.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3829.</note> Antiochus Epiphanes, brother of Seleucus Philopator,
eleven.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>III. The Kingdom of Macedonia.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3707.</note> Macedonia frequently changed its masters, after
the solemn partition had been made between the four princes.
Cassander died three or four years after that partition,
and left three sons. Philip, the eldest, died shortly after
his father. The other two contended for the crown without
enjoying it, both dying soon after without issue.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3710.</note> Demetrius Poliorcetes, Pyrrhus, and Lysimachus,
made themselves masters of all, or the greatest part of Macedonia;
<pb n='cxxvii'/><anchor id='Pgcxxvii'/>
sometimes in conjunction, and at other times separately.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3723.</note> After the death of Lysimachus, Seleucus possessed
himself of Macedonia, but did not long enjoy it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3724.</note> Ptolemy Ceraunus having slain the preceding
prince, seized the kingdom, and possessed it but a very short
time, having lost his life in a battle with the Gauls, who had
made an irruption into that country.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3726.</note> Sosthenes, who defeated the Gauls, reigned but a
short time in Macedonia.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3728.</note> Antigonus Gonatas, the son of Demetrius Poliorcetes,
at length obtained the peaceable possession of the
kingdom of Macedonia, and transmitted it to his descendants,
after he had reigned thirty-four years.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3762.</note> He was succeeded by his son Demetrius, who
reigned ten years, and then died, leaving a son named Philip,
who was but two years old.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3772.</note> Antigonus Doson reigned twelve years in the quality
of guardian to the young prince.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3784.</note> Philip, after the death of Antigonus, ascended the
throne at the age of fourteen years, and reigned something
more than forty.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3824.</note> His son Perseus succeeded him, and reigned about
eleven years. He was defeated and taken prisoner by Paulus
Emilius; and Macedonia, in consequence of that victory, was
added to the provinces of the Roman empire.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>IV. The Kingdom of Thrace, and Bithynia, &amp;c.</head>

<p>
This fourth kingdom, composed of several separate provinces
very remote from one another, had not any succession
of princes, and did not long subsist in its first condition; Lysimachus,
who first obtained it, having been killed in a battle
after a reign of twenty years, and all his family being exterminated
by assassinations, his dominions were dismembered, and
no longer constituted one kingdom.
</p>

<p>
Beside the provinces which were divided among the captains
of Alexander, there were others which had been either formed
before, or were then erected into different states, independent
of the Greeks, whose power greatly increased in process of
time.
</p>

<div>
<head>Kings of Bithynia</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3686.</note> Whilst Alexander was extending his conquests in
the east, Zypethes had laid the foundations of the kingdom of
<pb n='cxxviii'/><anchor id='Pgcxxviii'/>
Bithynia. It is not certain who this Zypethes was, unless that
Pausanias,<note place='foot'>Lib. v. p. 310.&mdash;Trans.</note>
from his name, conjectures that he was a Thracian.
His successors, however, are better known.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3726.</note> Nicomedes I. This prince invited the Gauls to
assist him against his brother, with whom he was
engaged in a war.
</p>

<p>
Prusias I.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3820.</note> Prusias II., surnamed the Hunter, in whose court
Hannibal took refuge, and assisted him with his counsels, in
his war against Eumenes II. king of Pergamus.
</p>

<p>
Nicomedes II. was killed by his son Socrates.
</p>

<p>
Nicomedes III. was assisted by the Romans in his wars
with Mithridates, and bequeathed to them at his death the
kingdom of Bithynia, as a testimonial of his gratitude to them;
by which means these territories became a Roman province.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Kings of Pergamus</head>

<p>
This kingdom at first comprehended only one of the smallest
provinces of Mysia, on the coast of the Ægean sea, over-against
the island of Lesbos.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3721. Ant. J.C. 283.</note>
It was founded by Philetærus, an eunuch, who had
served under Docimus, a commander of the troops
of Antigonus. Lysimachus confided to him the
treasures he had deposited in the castle of the city of Pergamus,
and he became master both of these and the city after
the death of that prince. He governed this little sovereignty
for the space of twenty years, and then left it to Eumenes his
nephew.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3741. Ant. J.C. 263.</note>
Eumenes I. enlarged his principality, by the addition
of several cities, which he took from the kings of
Syria, having defeated Antiochus, the son of Seleucus,
in a battle. He reigned twenty-two years.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3763. Ant. J.C. 241.</note>
He was succeeded by Attalus I., his cousin-german,
who assumed the title of king, after he had conquered
the Galatians; and transmitted it to his posterity,
who enjoyed it to the third generation. He assisted the
Romans in their war with Philip, and died after a reign of
forty-three years. He left four sons.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3807. Ant. J.C. 197.</note>
His successor was Eumenes II., his eldest son, who
founded the famous library of Pergamus. He
reigned thirty-nine years, and left the crown to his
brother Attalus, in the quality of guardian to one of his sons,
<pb n='cxxix'/><anchor id='Pgcxxix'/>
whom he had by Stratonice, the sister of Ariarathes, king of
Cappadocia. The Romans enlarged his dominions considerably,
after the victory they obtained over Antiochus the
Great.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3845. Ant. J.C. 159.</note>
Attalus II. espoused Stratonice his brother's widow,
and took extraordinary care of his nephew, to whom
he left the crown, after he had worn it twenty-one
years.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3866. Ant. J.C. 138.</note>
Attalus III., surnamed Philometor, distinguished
himself by his barbarous and extravagant conduct.
He died after he had reigned five years, and bequeathed
his riches and dominions to the Romans.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3871. Ant. J.C. 133.</note>
Aristonicus, who claimed the succession, endeavoured
to defend his pretensions against the Romans;
but the kingdom of Pergamus was reduced after a war
of four years, into a Roman province.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Kings of Pontus.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3490. Ant. J.C. 514.</note>
The kingdom of Pontus in Asia Minor was anciently
dismembered from the monarchy of Persia,
by Darius the son of Hystaspes, in favour of Artabazus,
who is said, by some historians, to have been the son of
one of those Persian lords who conspired against the Magi.
</p>

<p>
Pontus is a region of Asia Minor, situated partly along the
coast of the Euxine sea (<hi rend='italic'>Pontus Euxinus</hi>), from which it
derives its name. It extends from the river Halys, as far as
Colchis. Several princes reigned in that country since Artabazus.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3600. Ant. J.C. 404.</note>
The sixth monarch was Mithridates I., who is properly
considered as the founder of the kingdom of
Pontus, and his name was assumed by the generality
of his successors.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3641. Ant. J.C. 363.</note>
He was succeeded by his son Ariobarzanes, who
had governed Phrygia under Artaxerxes Mnemon:
he reigned twenty-six years.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3667. Ant. J.C. 337.</note>
His successor was Mithridates II. Antigonus
suspecting, in consequence of a dream, that he favoured
Cassander, had determined to destroy him,
but he eluded the danger by flight. This prince was called
Κτισὴς, or <emph>the Founder</emph>, and reigned thirty-five years.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3702. Ant. J.C. 302.</note>
Mithridates III., who succeeded him, added Cappadocia
and Paphlagonia to his dominions, and
reigned thirty-six years.
</p>

<p>
After the reigns of two other kings, Mithridates IV., the great
<pb n='cxxx'/><anchor id='Pgcxxx'/>
grandfather of Mithridates the Great, ascended the throne,
and espoused a daughter of Seleucus Callinicus, king of
Syria, by whom he had Laodice, who was married to Antiochus
the Great.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3819. Ant. J.C. 185.</note>
He was succeeded by his son Pharnaces, who had
some disagreement with the kings of Pergamus. He
made himself master of Sinope, which afterwards
became the capital of the kingdom of Pontus.
</p>

<p>
After him reigned Mithridates V., surnamed Euergetes, the
first who was called the friend of the Romans, because he had
assisted them against the Carthaginians in the third Punic
war.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3880. Ant. J.C. 124.</note>
He was succeeded by his son Mithridates VI., surnamed
Eupator. This is the great Mithridates who
sustained so long a war with the Romans: he reigned
sixty-six years.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Kings of Cappadocia.</head>

<p>
Strabo informs us,<note place='foot'>Strab. l. xii. p. 534.</note>
that Cappadocia was divided into two
satrapies, or governments, under the Persians, as it also was
under the Macedonians. The maritime part of Cappadocia
formed the kingdom of Pontus: the other tracts constituted
Cappadocia properly so called, or Cappadocia Major, which
extended along mount Taurus, and to a great distance beyond
it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3682. Ant. J.C. 322.</note>
When Alexander's captains divided the provinces
of his empire among themselves, Cappadocia was
governed by a prince named Ariarathes. Perdiccas
attacked and defeated him, after which he caused him to be
slain.
</p>

<p>
His son Ariarathes re-entered the kingdom of his father
some time after this event, and established himself so effectually,
that he left it to his posterity.
</p>

<p>
The generality of his successors assumed the same name,
and will have their place in the series of the history.
</p>

<p>
Cappadocia, after the death of Archelaus, the last of its
kings, became a province of the Roman empire, as the rest of
Asia also did much about the same time.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Kings of Armenia.</head>

<p>
Armenia, a vast country of Asia, extending on each side of
the Euphrates, was conquered by the Persians; after which it
<pb n='cxxxi'/><anchor id='Pgcxxxi'/>
was transferred, with the rest of the empire, to the Macedonians,
and at last fell to the share of the Romans. It was
governed for a great length of time by its own kings, the most
considerable of whom was Tigranes, who espoused the daughter
of the great Mithridates king of Pontus, and was also engaged
in a long war with the Romans. This kingdom supported itself
many years, between the Roman and Parthian empires, sometimes
depending on the one, and sometimes on the other, till at
last the Romans became its masters.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Kings of Epirus.</head>

<p>
Epirus is a province of Greece, separated from Thessaly
and Macedonia by mount Pindus. The most powerful people
of this country were the Molossians.
</p>

<p>
The kings of Epirus pretended to derive their descent from
Pyrrhus the son of Achilles, who established himself in that
country, and called themselves Æacides, from Æacus the
grandfather of Achilles.
</p>

<p>
The genealogy of the latter kings, who were the only sovereigns
of this country of whom any accounts remain, is
variously related by authors, and consequently must be doubtful
and obscure.<note place='foot'>Diod. l. xvi. p. 465. Justin, l.
viii. c. 6. Plut. <hi rend='italic'>in Pyrrho</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Arymbas ascended the throne, after a long succession of
kings; and as he was then very young, the states of Epirus,
who were sensible that the welfare of the people depends on
the proper education of their princes, sent him to Athens,
which was the residence and centre of all the arts and sciences,
in order to cultivate, in that excellent school, such knowledge
as was necessary to form the mind of a king. He there learned
the art of reigning, and as he surpassed all his ancestors in
ability and knowledge, he was in consequence infinitely more
esteemed and beloved by his people than they had been.<note place='foot'>Quanto
doctior majoribus, tanto et gratioi populo fuit. Justin, l. xvii. c.
3.&mdash;Trans.</note> When
he returned from Athens, he made laws, established a senate
and magistracy, and regulated the form of the government.
</p>

<p>
Neoptolemus, whose daughter Olympias had espoused Philip
king of Macedon, attained an equal share in the regal government
with Arymbas his elder brother, by the influence of his
son-in-law. After the death of Arymbas, Æacides his son
ought to have been his successor; but Philip had still sufficient
influence to procure his expulsion from the kingdom by the
Molossians, who established Alexander the son of Neoptolemus
sole monarch of Epirus.
</p>

<pb n='cxxxii'/><anchor id='Pgcxxxii'/>

<p>
Alexander espoused Cleopatra the daughter of Philip, and
marched with an army into Italy, where he lost his life in the
country of the Brutians.
</p>

<p>
Æacides then ascended the throne, and reigned without any
associate in Epirus. He espoused Phthia, the daughter of
Menon the Thessalian, by whom he had two daughters, Deidamia
and Troias, and one son, the celebrated Pyrrhus.
</p>

<p>
As he was marching to the assistance of Olympias, his troops
mutinied against him, condemned him to exile, and slaughtered
most of his friends. Pyrrhus, who was then an infant, happily
escaped this massacre.
</p>

<p>
Neoptolemus, a prince of the blood, but whose particular
extraction is little known, was placed on the throne by the
people of Epirus.
</p>

<p>
Pyrrhus, being recalled by his subjects at the age of twelve
years, first shared the sovereignty with Neoptolemus; but
having afterwards divested him of his dignity, he reigned alone.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3733. Ant. J.C. 271.</note>
This history will treat of the various adventures of
this prince. He died in the city of Argos, in an
attack to make himself master of it.
</p>

<p>
Helenus his son reigned after him for some time in Epirus,
which was afterwards united to the Roman empire.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Tyrants of Heraclea.</head>

<p>
Heraclea is a city of Pontus, anciently founded by the
Bœotians, who sent a colony into that country by the order of
an oracle.
</p>

<p>
When the Athenians, having conquered the Persians, had
imposed a tribute on the cities of Greece and Asia Minor, for
the fitting out and support of a fleet intended for the defence
of the common liberty, the inhabitants of Heraclea, in consequence
of their attachment to the Persians, were the only people
who refused to acquiesce in so just a contribution.<note place='foot'>Justin,
l. xvi. c. 3-5. Diod. l. xv. p. 390.</note> Lamachus
was therefore sent against them, and he ravaged their
territories; but a violent tempest having destroyed his whole
fleet, he beheld himself abandoned to the mercy of that people,
whose innate ferocity might naturally have been increased by
the severe treatment they had lately received. But they had
recourse to no other vengeance than kindness;<note place='foot'>Heraclienses
honestiorem beneficii, quàm ultionis occasionem rati, instructos
commeatibus auxiliisque aimittunt; bene agrorum suorum populationem impensam
existimantes, si, quos hostes habuerant, amicos reddidissent.
Justin.&mdash;Trans.</note> they furnished
him with provisions and troops for his return, and were willing
<pb n='cxxxiii'/><anchor id='Pgcxxxiii'/>
to consider the depredations which had been committed in
their country as advantageous to them, if at that price they
could convert the enmity of the Athenians into friendship.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3640. Ant. J.C. 364.</note>
Some time after this event, the populace of Heraclea excited
a violent commotion against the rich citizens and
senators, who having implored assistance to no effect,
first from Timotheus the Athenian, and afterwards
from Epaminondas the Theban, were necessitated to recall
Clearchus, a senator, to their defence, whom themselves had
banished; but his exile had neither improved his morals nor
rendered him a better citizen than he was before. He therefore
made the troubles, in which he found the city involved,
subservient to his design of subjecting it to his own power.
With this view he openly declared for the people, caused himself
to be invested with the highest office in the magistracy, and
assumed a sovereign authority in a short time. Being thus
become a professed tyrant, there were no kinds of violence to
which he had not recourse against the rich, and the senators,
to satiate his avarice and cruelty. He proposed for his model
Dionysius the Tyrant, who had established his power over the
Syracusans at the same time.
</p>

<p>
After a hard and inhuman servitude of twelve years, two
young citizens, who were Plato's disciples, and had been instructed
in his maxims, formed a conspiracy against Clearchus,
and slew him; but, though they delivered their country from
the tyrant, the tyranny still subsisted.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3652. Ant. J.C. 352.</note>
Timotheus, the son of Clearchus, assumed his
place, and pursued his conduct for the space of
fifteen years.<note place='foot'>l. xvi. p. 435.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3667. Ant. J.C. 337.</note>
He was succeeded by his brother Dionysius, who was in
danger of being dispossessed of his authority by
Perdiccas; but as this last was soon destroyed,
Dionysius contracted a friendship with Antigonus,
whom he assisted against Ptolemy in the Cyprian war.<note place='foot'>Ibid. p.
478.</note>
</p>

<p>
He espoused Amastris, the widow of Craterus, and daughter
of Oxiathres, the brother of Darius. This alliance inspired
him with so much courage, that he assumed the title of king,
and enlarged his dominions by the addition of several places,
which he seized, on the confines of Heraclea.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3700. Ant. J.C. 304.</note>
He died two or three years before the battle of
Ipsus, after a reign of thirty-three years, leaving two
sons and a daughter under the tutelage and regency
of Amastris.
</p>

<pb n='cxxxiv'/><anchor id='Pgcxxxiv'/>

<p>
This princess was rendered happy in her administration, by
the affection Antigonus entertained for her. She founded a
city, and called it by her own name; into which she transplanted
the inhabitants of three other cities, and espoused Lysimachus,
after the death of Antigonus.<note place='foot'>Diod. l. xx. p. 833.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Kings of Syracuse.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3735. Ant. J.C. 269.</note>
Hiero, and his son Hieronymus, reigned at Syracuse;
the first fifty-four years, the second but one
year.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3789. Ant. J.C. 215.</note>
Syracuse recovered its liberty by the death of the
last, but continued in the interest of the Carthaginians,
which Hieronymus had caused it to espouse.
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3791. Ant. J.C. 213.</note>
His conduct obliged Marcellus to form the siege of that city,
which he took the following year. I shall enlarge
upon the history of these two kings in another
place.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Other Kings.</head>

<p>
Several kings likewise reigned in the Cimmerian Bosphorus,
as also in Thrace, Cyrene in Africa, Paphlagonia, Colchis,
Iberia, Albania, and a variety of other places; but their history
is very uncertain, and their successions have but little regularity.
</p>

<p>
These circumstances are very different with respect to the
kingdom of the Parthians, who formed themselves, as we shall
see in the sequel, into such a powerful monarchy, as became
formidable even to the Roman empire. That of the Bactrians
received its original about the same period: I shall treat of
each in their proper places.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='cxxxv'/><anchor id='Pgcxxxv'/>

<div>
<head>Catalogue of the Editions of the principal Greek Authors cited in
this Work.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Herodotus.</hi> Francof. An. 1608.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Thucydides.</hi> Apud Henricum Stephanum, An. 1588.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Xenophon.</hi> Lutetiæ Parisiorum, apud Societatem Græcarum
Editionum, An.
1625.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Polybius.</hi> Parisiis, An. 1609.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Diodorus Siculus.</hi> Hanoviæ, Typis Wechelianis, An 1604.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Plutarchus.</hi> Lutetiæ Parisiorum, apud Societatem Græcanum
Editionum, An. 1624.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Strabo.</hi> Lutetiæ Parisiorum, Typis regiis, An. 1620.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Athenæus.</hi> Lugdani, An. 1612.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Pausanias.</hi> Hanoviæ, Typis Wechelianis, An. 1613.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Appianus Alexander.</hi> Apud Henric. Stephan. An. 1592.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Plato.</hi> Ex novâ Joannis Serrani interpretatione. Apud
Henricum Stephanum, An. 1578.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Aristoteles.</hi> Lutetiæ Parisiorum, apud Societatem Græcarum
Editionum, An. 1619.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Isocrates.</hi> Apud Paulum Stephanum, An. 1604.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Diogenes Laertius.</hi> Apud Henricum Stepnanum, An. 1594.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Demosthenes.</hi> Francof. An. 1604.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Arrianus.</hi> Lugd. Batav. An. 1704.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Book The First. The History of the Egyptians.'/>
<head>Book The First. The Ancient History Of The Egyptians.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc' level1='Part The First. Description of Egypt.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Part The First. Description of Egypt.'/>
<head>Part The First.
Description of Egypt: with an Account of whatever is
most curious and remarkable in that Country.</head>

<p>
Egypt comprehended anciently, within limits of no very great
extent, a prodigious number of cities,<note place='foot'>It is related,
that under Amasis there were twenty thousand inhabited cities in
Egypt. Herod 1. ii c. 177.&mdash;Trans.</note> and an incredible multitude
of inhabitants.
</p>

<p>
It is bounded on the east by the Red-Sea and the Isthmus
of Suez; on the south by Ethiopia, on the west by Libya, and
on the north by the Mediterranean. The Nile runs from south
to north, through the whole country, about two hundred leagues
in length. This country is enclosed on each side with a ridge
of mountains, which very often leave, between the foot of the
hills and the river Nile, a tract of ground, of not above half a
day's journey in length,<note place='foot'>A day's journey is
twenty-four eastern, or thirty-three English miles and a
quarter.&mdash;Trans.</note> and sometimes less.
</p>

<p>
On the west side, the plain grows wider in some places, and
extends to twenty-five or thirty leagues. The greatest breadth
of Egypt is from Alexandria to Damietta, being about fifty
leagues.
</p>

<p>
Ancient Egypt may be divided into three principal parts:
Upper Egypt, otherwise called Thebais, which was the most
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
southern part; Middle Egypt, or Heptanomis, so called from
the seven Nomi or districts it contained; Lower Egypt, which
included what the Greeks call Delta, and all the country as far
as the Red-Sea, and along the Mediterranean to Rhinocolura,
or Mount Casius. Under Sesostris, all Egypt became one
kingdom, and was divided into thirty-six governments, or
Nomi; ten in Thebais, ten in Delta, and sixteen in the country
between both.<note place='foot'>Strabo, 1 xvii. p. 787.</note>
</p>

<p>
The cities of Syene and Elephantina divided Egypt from
Ethiopia; and in the days of Augustus were the boundaries of
the Roman empire: <hi rend='italic'>Claustra olim Romani Imperii</hi>, Tacit.
<hi rend='italic'>Annal.</hi> Lib. ii. cap. 61.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Thebais.</head>

<p>
Thebes, from whence Thebais had its name, might vie with
the noblest cities in the universe. Its hundred gates, celebrated
by Homer,<note place='foot'>Hom. <hi rend='italic'>Il.</hi> i.
ver. 381.</note> are universally known; and acquired it the
surname of Hecatompylos, to distinguish it from the other
Thebes in Bœotia. Its population was proportionate to its
extent; and, according to History, it could send out at once
two hundred chariots, and ten thousand fighting men at each
of its gates.<note place='foot'>Strab. 1. xvii. p. 816.</note>
The Greeks and Romans have celebrated its
magnificence and grandeur, though they saw it only in its
ruins; so august were the remains of this city.<note place='foot'>Tacit.
<hi rend='italic'>Ann.</hi> 1. ii. c. 60.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the Thebaid, now called Said, have been discovered temples
and palaces which are still almost entire, adorned with innumerable
columns and statues.<note place='foot'>Thevenot's
<hi rend='italic'>Travels</hi>.</note> One palace especially is admired,
the remains whereof seem to have existed purely to
eclipse the glory of the most pompous edifices. Four walks
extending farther than the eye can see, and bounded on each
side with sphinxes, composed of materials as rare and extraordinary
as their size is remarkable, serve as avenues to four porticos,
whose height is amazing to behold. And even they who
have given us the description of this wonderful edifice, had not
time to go round it; and are not sure that they saw above
half: however, what they had a sight of was astonishing. A
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
hall, which, in all appearance, stood in the middle of this
stately palace, was supported by a hundred-and-twenty pillars,
six fathoms round, of a proportionable height, and intermixed
with obelisks, which so many ages have not been able to demolish.
Painting had displayed all her art and magnificence
in this edifice. The colours themselves, which soonest feel the
injury of time, still remain amidst the ruins of this wonderful
structure, and preserve their beauty and lustre; so happily
could the Egyptians imprint a character of immortality on all
their works. Strabo, who was on the spot, describes a temple
he saw in Egypt, very much resembling that of which I
have been speaking.<note place='foot'>Lib. xvii. p. 805.</note>
</p>

<p>
The same author, describing the curiosities of Thebais,<note place='foot'>P.
816.</note> speaks of a very famous statue of Memnon, the remains whereof
he had seen. It is said that this statue, when the beams of the
rising sun first shone upon it in the morning, uttered an articulate
sound.<note place='foot'>Germanicus alus quoque miraculis intendit animum, quorum
præcipua fuere Memnonis saxea effigies, ubi radiis solis icta est, vocalem sonum
reddens, &amp;c. Tacit <hi rend='italic'>Annal.</hi> 1. ii. c. 61.&mdash;Trans.</note>
And, indeed, Strabo himself was an ear-witness
of this; but then he doubts whether the sound came from
the statue.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. Middle Egypt, or Heptanomis.</head>

<p>
Memphis was the capital of this part of Egypt. In this city
were to be seen many stately temples, among them that of the
god Apis, who was honoured here after a peculiar manner. I
shall speak of it hereafter, as well as of the pyramids which
stood in the neighbourhood of this place, and rendered it so
famous. Memphis was situated on the west side of the Nile.
</p>

<p>
Grand Cairo, which seems to have succeeded Memphis, is
built on the other side of that river.<note place='foot'>Thevenot.</note>
The castle of Cairo is one
of the greatest curiosities in Egypt. It stands on a hill without
the city, has a rock for its foundation, and is surrounded with
walls of a vast height and solidity. You go up to the castle by
a way hewn out of the rock, and which is so easy of ascent,
that loaded horses and camels get up without difficulty. The
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
greatest rarity in this castle is Joseph's well, so called, either
because the Egyptians are pleased with ascribing what is most
remarkable among them to that great man, or because such a
tradition has been preserved in the country. This is a proof,
at least, that the work in question is very ancient; and it is
certainly worthy the magnificence of the most powerful kings
of Egypt. This well has, as it were, two stories, cut out of the
solid rock to a prodigious depth. The descent to the reservoir
of water, between the two wells, is by a staircase seven or eight
feet broad, consisting of two hundred and twenty steps, and so
contrived, that the oxen employed to throw up the water, go
down with all imaginable ease, the descent being scarcely perceptible.
The well is supplied from a spring, which is almost
the only one in the whole country. The oxen are continually
turning a wheel with a rope, to which a number of buckets are
fastened. The water thus drawn from the first and lower-most
well, is conveyed by a little canal into a reservoir, which forms
the second well; from whence it is drawn to the top in the
same manner, and then conveyed by pipes to all parts of the
castle. As this well is supposed by the inhabitants of the country
to be of great antiquity, and has, indeed, much of the antique
manner of the Egyptians, I thought it might deserve a
place among the curiosities of ancient Egypt.
</p>

<p>
Strabo speaks of a similar engine, which, by wheels and
pulleys, threw up the water of the Nile to the top of a very high
hill; with this difference, that, instead of oxen, a hundred and
fifty slaves were employed to turn these wheels.<note place='foot'>L. xvii. p. 807.</note>
</p>

<p>
The part of Egypt of which we now speak, is famous for several
rarities, each of which deserves a particular examination.
I shall mention only the principal, such as the obelisks, the
pyramids, the labyrinth, the lake of Mœris, and the Nile.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sect. I. The Obelisks.</hi>&mdash;Egypt
seemed to place its chief glory in raising monuments for posterity. Its obelisks form at
this day, on account of their beauty as well as height, the principal
ornament of Rome; and the Roman power, despairing to
equal the Egyptians, thought it honour enough to borrow the
monuments of their kings.
</p>

<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>

<p>
An obelisk is a quadrangular, taper, high spire or pyramid,
raised perpendicularly, and terminating in a point, to serve as
an ornament to some open square; and is very often covered
with inscriptions or hieroglyphics, that is, with mystical characters
or symbols used by the Egyptians to conceal and disguise
their sacred things, and the mysteries of their theology.
</p>

<p>
Sesostris erected in the city of Heliopolis two obelisks of
extreme hard stone, brought from the quarries of Syene, at the
extremity of Egypt.<note place='foot'>Diod. lib. i. p.
37.</note> They were each one hundred-and-twenty
cubits high, that is, thirty fathoms, or one hundred and eighty
feet.<note place='foot'>It is proper to observe, once for all,
that an Egyptian cubit, according to Mr. Greaves, was one foot
nine inches, and about 3/4 of our measure.&mdash;Trans.</note>
The emperor Augustus, having made Egypt a province
of the empire, caused these two obelisks to be transported to
Rome, one whereof was afterwards broken to pieces. He
dared not venture to make the same attempt upon a third,
which was of a monstrous size.<note place='foot'>Plin. l.
xxxvi. c. 8, 9.</note> It was made in the reign of
Rameses: it is said that twenty thousand men were employed
in the cutting of it. Constantius, more daring than Augustus,
caused it to be removed to Rome. Two of these obelisks are
still to be seen there, as well as another a hundred cubits, or
twenty-five fathoms high, and eight cubits, or two fathoms, in
diameter. Caius Cæsar had it brought from Egypt in a ship
of so odd a form, that, according to Pliny, the like had never
been seen.<note place='foot'>Plin. l. xxxvi c. 9.</note>
</p>

<p>
Every part of Egypt abounded with this kind of obelisks;
they were for the most part cut in the quarries of Upper Egypt,
where some are now to be seen half finished. But the most
wonderful circumstance is, that the ancient Egyptians should
have had the art and contrivance to dig even in the very quarry
a canal, through which the water of the Nile ran in the time of
its inundation; from whence they afterwards raised up the columns,
obelisks, and statues on rafts,<note place='foot'>Rafts are pieces
of flat timber put together to carry goods on
rivers.&mdash;Trans.</note> proportioned to their
weight, in order to convey them into Lower Egypt. And as
the country was intersected every where with canals, there were
few places to which those huge bodies might not be carried
with ease; although their weight would have broken every
other kind of engine.
</p>

<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sect. II. The Pyramids.</hi>&mdash;A
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Pyramid</hi> is a solid or hollow
body, having a large, and generally a square base, and terminating
in a point.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. ii c. 124, &amp;c. Diod. l.
i. p. 39-41. Plin. lib. xxxvi. c. 12.</note>
</p>

<p>
There were three pyramids in Egypt more famous than the
rest, one whereof was justly ranked among the seven wonders
of the world; they stood not very far from the city of Memphis.
I shall take notice here only of the largest of the three.
This pyramid, like the rest, was built on a rock, having a square
base, cut on the outside as so many steps, and decreasing gradually
quite to the summit. It was built with stones of a prodigious
size, the least of which were thirty feet, wrought with
wonderful art, and covered with hieroglyphics. According to
several ancient authors, each side was eight hundred feet broad,
and as many high. The summit of the pyramid, which to those
who viewed it from below seemed a point, was a fine platform,
composed of ten or twelve massy stones, and each side of that
platform sixteen or eighteen feet long.
</p>

<p>
M. de Chazelles, of the Academy of Sciences, who went purposely
to the spot in 1693, gives us the following dimensions:
</p>

<p>
The side of the square base 110 fathoms; the fronts are
equilateral triangles, and therefore the superficies of the base is
12100 square fathoms; the perpendicular height, 77-3/4 fathoms;
the solid contents, 313590 cubical fathoms. A hundred thousand
men were constantly employed about this work, and were relieved
every three months by the same number. Ten complete years were
spent in hewing out the stones, either in Arabia or Ethiopia,
and in conveying them to Egypt; and twenty years more in
building this immense edifice, the inside of which contained
numberless rooms and apartments. There were expressed on
the pyramid, in Egyptian characters, the sums it cost only for
garlic, leeks, onions, and other vegetables of this description,
for the workmen; and the whole amounted to sixteen hundred
talents of silver,<note place='foot'>About 200,000<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>
sterl.&mdash;Trans.</note> that is, four millions five hundred thousand
French livres; from whence it was easy to conjecture what a
vast sum the whole expense must have amounted to.
</p>

<p>
Such were the famous Egyptian pyramids, which by their
figure, as well as size, have triumphed over the injuries of time
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
and the Barbarians. But what efforts soever men may make,
their nothingness will always appear. These pyramids were
tombs; and there is still to be seen, in the middle of the largest,
an empty sepulchre, cut out of one entire stone, about three
feet deep and broad, and a little above six feet long.<note place='foot'>Strabo
mentions the sepulchre, lib. xvii. p. 808.&mdash;Trans.</note> Thus
all this bustle, all this expense, and all the labours of so many
thousand men for so many years, ended in procuring for a
prince, in this vast and almost boundless pile of building, a
little vault six feet in length. Besides, the kings who built
these pyramids, had it not in their power to be buried in them;
and so did not enjoy the sepulchre they had built. The public
hatred which they incurred, by reason of their unheard-of cruelties
to their subjects, in laying such heavy tasks upon them,
occasioned their being interred in some obscure place, to prevent
their bodies from being exposed to the fury and vengeance
of the populace.
</p>

<p>
This last circumstance, which historians have taken particular
notice of, teaches us what judgment we ought to pass on
these edifices, so much boasted of by the ancients.<note place='foot'>Diod.
lib. i. p. 40.</note> It is but
just to remark and esteem the noble genius which the Egyptians
had for architecture; a genius that prompted them from the
earliest times, and before they could have any models to imitate,
to aim in all things at the grand and magnificent; and to be
intent on real beauties, without deviating in the least from a
noble simplicity, in which the highest perfection of the art
consists. But what idea ought we to form of those princes,
who considered as something grand, the raising by a multitude
of hands, and by the help of money, immense structures, with
the sole view of rendering their names immortal; and who did
not scruple to destroy thousands of their subjects to satisfy
their vain glory! They differed very much from the Romans,
who sought to immortalize themselves by works of a magnificent
kind, but, at the same time, of public utility.
</p>

<p>
Pliny gives us, in few words,<note place='foot'>Lib. xxxvi. c.
12.</note> a just idea of these pyramids,
when he calls them a foolish and useless ostentation of the
wealth of the Egyptian kings; <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Regum pecuniæ otiosa ac
stulta ostentatio.</foreign> And adds, that by a just punishment their memory
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
is buried in oblivion; the historians not agreeing among themselves
about the names of those who first raised those vain
monuments: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Inter eos non constat à quibus factæ sint,
justissimo casu obliteratis tantæ vanitatis auctoribus.</foreign> In a word,
according to the judicious remark of Diodorus, the industry of
the architects of those pyramids is no less valuable and praiseworthy,
than the design of the Egyptian kings is contemptible
and ridiculous.
</p>

<p>
But what we should most admire in these ancient monuments,
is, the true and standing evidence they give of the skill
of the Egyptians in astronomy; that is, in a science which
seems incapable of being brought to perfection, but by a long
series of years, and a great number of observations. M. de
Chazelles, when he measured the great pyramid in question,
found that the four sides of it were turned exactly to the four
quarters of the world; and, consequently, showed the true
meridian of that place. Now, as so exact a situation was, in
all probability, purposely pitched upon by those who piled up
this huge mass of stones, above three thousand years ago, it
follows, that during so long a space of time, there has been no
alteration in the heavens in that respect, or (which amounts to
the same thing) in the poles of the earth or the meridians.
This is M. de Fontenelle's remark in his eulogium of M. de
Chazelles.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sect. III. The Labyrinth.</hi>&mdash;What has been said concerning
the judgment we ought to form of the pyramids, may
also be applied to the labyrinth, which Herodotus, who saw it,
assures us, was still more surprising than the pyramids.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. ii.
c. 148. Diod. l. i. p. 42. Plin. l. xxxvi. c. 13. Strab. l. xvii. p. 811.</note> It
was built at the southern extremity of the lake of Mœris,
whereof mention will be made presently, near the town of
Crocodiles, the same with Arsinoë. It was not so much one
single palace, as a magnificent pile composed of twelve palaces,
regularly disposed, which had a communication with each
other. Fifteen hundred rooms, interspersed with terraces,
were ranged round twelve halls, and discovered no outlet to
such as went to see them. There was the like number of
buildings under ground. These subterraneous structures were
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
designed for the burying-place of the kings, and also (who can
speak this without confusion, and without deploring the blindness
of man!) for keeping the sacred crocodiles, which a nation,
so wise in other respects, worshipped as gods.
</p>

<p>
In order to visit the rooms and halls of the labyrinth, it was
necessary, as the reader will naturally suppose, for people to
take the same precaution as Ariadne made Theseus use, when
he was obliged to go and fight the Minotaur in the labyrinth
of Crete. Virgil describes it in this manner:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Ut quondam Cretâ fertur labyrinthus in altâ</l>
<l>Parietibus textum cæcis iter ancipitémque</l>
<l>Mille viis habuisse dolum, quà signa sequendi</l>
<l>Falleret indeprensus et irremeabilis error.<note place='foot'>Æneid, l. v. ver. 588,
&amp;c.</note></l>
<l>Híc labor ille domûs, et inextricabilis error.</l>
<l>Dædalus, ipse dolos tecti ambagésque resolvit,</l>
<l>Cæca regens filo vestigia.<note place='foot'>l. vi. ver. 27, &amp;c.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>And as the Cretan labyrinth of old,</l>
<l>With wand'ring ways, and many a winding fold,</l>
<l>Involv'd the weary feet without redress,</l>
<l>In a round error, which deny'd recess:</l>
<l>Not far from thence he grav'd the wond'rous maze;</l>
<l>A thousand doors, a thousand winding ways</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sect. IV. The Lake of Mœris.</hi>&mdash;The noblest and most
wonderful of all the structures or works of the kings of Egypt,
was the lake of Mœris: accordingly, Herodotus considers it as
vastly superior to the pyramids and labyrinth.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. ii. c. 140.
Strab. l. xvii. p. 787. Diod. l. i p. 47. Plin. l. v. c. 9.
Pomp. <hi rend='italic'>Mela</hi>, l. i.</note> As Egypt was
more or less fruitful in proportion to the inundations of the
Nile; and as in these floods, the too great or too little rise of
the waters was equally fatal to the lands, king Mœris, to prevent
these two inconveniences, and to correct, as far as lay in his
power, the irregularities of the Nile, thought proper to call art
to the assistance of nature; and so caused the lake to be dug,
which afterwards went by his name. This lake was in circumference
about three thousand six hundred stadia, that is,
about one hundred and eighty French leagues, and three hundred
feet deep.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vide Herod. et Diod.</hi> Pliny agrees
almost with them.&mdash;Trans.</note> Two pyramids, on each of which was placed a
colossal statue, seated on a throne, raised their heads to the
height of three hundred feet, in the midst of the lake, whilst
their foundations took up the same space under the water; a
proof that they were erected before the cavity was filled, and a
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
demonstration that a lake of such vast extent was the work of
man's hands, in one prince's reign. This is what several historians
have related concerning the lake Mœris, on the testimony
of the inhabitants of the country. And M. Bossuet, the bishop
of Meaux, in his discourse on universal history, relates the whole
as fact. For my part, I will confess that I do not see the least
probability in it. Is it possible to conceive, that a lake of a
hundred and eighty leagues in circumference, could have been
dug in the reign of one prince? In what manner, and where,
could the earth taken from it be conveyed? What should
prompt the Egyptians to lose the surface of so much land? By
what arts could they fill this vast tract with the superfluous
waters of the Nile? Many other objections might be made.
In my opinion, therefore, we ought to follow Pomponius Mela,
an ancient geographer; especially as his account is confirmed
by several modern travellers. According to that author, this
lake is but twenty thousand paces; that is, seven or eight
French leagues in circumference. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Mœris, aliquando campus,
nunc lacus, viginti millia passuum in circuitu patens.</foreign><note place='foot'>Mela,
l. i.</note>
</p>

<p>
This lake had a communication with the Nile, by a great
canal, more than four leagues long,<note place='foot'>Eighty-five
<hi rend='italic'>stadia</hi>.&mdash;Trans.</note> and fifty feet broad.
Great sluices either opened or shut the canal and lake, as there
was occasion.
</p>

<p>
The charge of opening or shutting them amounted to fifty
talents, that is, fifty thousand French
crowns.<note place='foot'>11,250<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> sterling.&mdash;Trans.</note>
The fishing of this lake brought the monarch immense sums; but its chief
utility related to the overflowing of the Nile. When it rose
too high, and was like to be attended with fatal consequences,
the sluices were opened; and the waters, having a free passage
into the lake, covered the lands no longer than was necessary
to enrich them. On the contrary, when the inundation was
too low, and threatened a famine, a sufficient quantity of water,
by the help of drains, was let out of the lake, to water the
lands. In this manner the irregularities of the Nile were corrected;
and Strabo remarks, that, in his time, under Petronius,
a governor of Egypt, when the inundation of the Nile was
twelve cubits, a very great plenty ensued; and even when it
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
rose but to eight cubits, the dearth was scarce felt in the country;
doubtless because the waters of the lake made up for
those of the inundation, by the help of canals and drains.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sect. V. The Inundations of the Nile.</hi>&mdash;The Nile is
the greatest wonder of Egypt. As it seldom rains there, this
river, which waters the whole country by its regular inundations,
supplies that defect, by bringing, as a yearly tribute, the rains
of other countries; which made a poet say ingeniously, <q>the
Egyptian pastures, how great soever the drought may be, never
implore Jupiter for rain:</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Te propter nullos tellus tua postulat imbres,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Arida nec pluvio supplicat herba Jovi.<note place='foot'>Seneca
(<hi rend='italic'>Nat. Quæst.</hi> l. iv. c. 2.) ascribes these verses to Ovid, but
they are Tibullus's.&mdash;Trans.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
To multiply so beneficent a river, Egypt was cut into numberless
canals, of a length and breadth proportioned to the
different situations and wants of the lands. The Nile brought
fertility every where with its salutary streams; united cities
one with another, and the Mediterranean with the Red-Sea;
maintained trade at home and abroad, and fortified the kingdom
against the enemy; so that it was at once the nourisher
and protector of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
The fields were delivered up to it; but the cities that were
raised with immense labour, and stood like islands in the midst
of the waters, looked down with joy on the plains which were
overflowed, and at the same time enriched, by the Nile.
</p>

<p>
This is a general idea of the nature and effects of this river,
so famous among the ancients. But a wonder so astonishing
in itself, and which has been the object of the curiosity and
admiration of the learned in all ages, seems to require a
more particular description, in which I shall be as concise as
possible.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>The Sources of the Nile.</hi>&mdash;The ancients placed the
sources of the Nile in the mountains of the moon (as they are
commonly called), in the 10th degree of south latitude. But
our modern travellers have discovered that they lie in the
12th degree of north latitude; and by that means they cut off
about four or five hundred leagues of the course which the
ancients gave that river. It rises at the foot of a great mountain
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
in the kingdom of Gojam in Abyssinia, from two springs,
or eyes, to speak in the language of the country, the same
word in Arabic signifying eye and fountain. These springs
are thirty paces from one another, each as large as one of our
wells or a coach-wheel. The Nile is increased with many
rivulets which run into it; and after passing through Ethiopia
in a very winding course, flows at last into Egypt.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>The Cataracts of the Nile.</hi>&mdash;This name is given to some
parts of the Nile, where the water falls down from the steep
rocks.<note place='foot'>Excipiunt eum (Nilum) cataractæ, nobilis insigni spectaculo
locus.&mdash;Illic excitatis primùm aquis, quas sine tumultu leni alveo duxerat,
violentus et toriens per malignos transitus prosilit, dissimilis sibi&mdash;tandemque
eluctatus obstantia, in vastam altitudinem subito destitutus cadit, cum ingenti
circumjacentium regionum strepitu; quem perferre gens ibi à Persis collocata non potuit,
obtusis assiduo fragore auribus, et ob hoc sedibus ad quietiora translatis. Inter
miracula fluminis incredibilem incolarum audaciam accepi. Bini parvula navigia
conscendunt, quorum alter navem regit, alter exhaurit. Deinde multùm inter rapidam
insaniam Nili et reciprocos fluctus volutati, tandem tenuissimos canales tenent, per
quos angusta rupium effugiunt: et cum toto flumine effusi navigium ruens manu temperant,
magnoque spectantium metu in caput nixi, cum jam adploraveris, mersosque atque obrutos
tantâ mole credideris, longè ab eo in quem ceciderant loco navigant, tormenti modo
missi. Nec mergit cadens unda, sed planis aquis tradit. Senec. <hi rend='italic'>Nat.
Quæst.</hi> l. iv. c. 2.&mdash;Trans.</note> This river, which at first glided smoothly
along the vast deserts of Ethiopia, before it enters Egypt, passes by
the cataracts. Then growing on a sudden, contrary to its nature,
raging and violent in those places where it is pent up and
restrained; after having, at last, broken through all obstacles
in its way, it precipitates itself from the top of some rocks to
the bottom, with so loud a noise, that it is heard three leagues off.
</p>

<p>
The inhabitants of the country, accustomed by long practice
to this sport, exhibit here a spectacle to travellers that is more
terrifying than diverting. Two of them go into a little boat;
the one to guide it, the other to throw out the water. After
having long sustained the violence of the raging waves, by
managing their little boat very dexterously, they suffer themselves
to be carried away with the impetuous torrent as swift as
an arrow. The affrighted spectator imagines they are going to
be swallowed up in the precipice down which they fall; when
the Nile, restored to its natural course, discovers them again,
at a considerable distance, on its smooth and calm waters.
This is Seneca's account, which is confirmed by our modern
travellers.
</p>

<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>Causes of the Inundations of the Nile.</hi>&mdash;The ancients
have invented many subtle reasons for the Nile's great increase,
as may be seen in Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, and Seneca.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. ii. c. 19-27. Diod. l. i. p. 35-39. Senec. <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Quæst.</hi> l. iv.
1 &amp; 2.</note>
But it is now no longer a matter of dispute, it being almost
universally allowed, that the inundations of the Nile are owing
to the great rains which fall in Ethiopia, from whence this river
flows. These rains swell it to such a degree, that Ethiopia first,
and then Egypt, are overflowed; and that which at first was
but a large river, rises like a sea, and overspreads the whole
country.
</p>

<p>
Strabo observes,<note place='foot'>Lib. xvii. p. 789.</note>
that the ancients only guessed that the
inundations of the Nile were owing to the rains which fall in
great abundance in Ethiopia; but adds, that several travellers
have since been eye-witnesses of it; Ptolemy Philadelphus,
who was very curious in all things relating to arts and sciences,
having sent thither able persons, purposely to examine this
matter, and to ascertain the cause of so uncommon and
remarkable an effect.
</p>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>The Time and Continuance of the Inundations.</hi>&mdash;Herodotus,
and after him Diodorus Siculus, and several other
authors, declare, that the Nile begins to swell in Egypt at the
summer solstice, that is, about the end of June, and continues to
rise till the end of September; and then decreases gradually
during the months of October and November; after which it
returns to its channel, and resumes its wonted course.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. ii. c. 19. Diod. l. i. p 32.</note> This
account agrees very nearly with the relations of all the moderns,
and is founded in reality on the natural cause of the inundation,
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> the rains which fall in Ethiopia. Now, according to the
constant testimony of those who have been on the spot, these
rains begin to fall in the month of April, and continue, during
five months, till the end of August and beginning of September.
The Nile's increase in Egypt must, consequently, begin three
weeks or a month after the rains have begun to fall in Abyssinia;
and accordingly travellers observe, that the Nile begins
to rise in the month of May, but so slowly at the first, that it
probably does not yet overflow its banks. The inundation
happens not till about the end of June, and lasts the three
following months, according to Herodotus.
</p>

<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>

<p>
I must point out to such as consult the originals, a contradiction
in this place between Herodotus and Diodorus on one
side; and between Strabo, Pliny, and Solinus, on the other.
These last shorten very much the continuance of the inundation;
and suppose the Nile to draw off from the lands in three
months or a hundred days. And what adds to the difficulty,
is, that Pliny seems to ground his opinion on the testimony of
Herodotus: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In totum autem revocatur Nilus intra ripas in
Librá, ut tradit Herodotus, centesimo die.</foreign> I leave to the
learned the reconciling of this contradiction.
</p>

<p>
5. <hi rend='italic'>The Height of the Inundations.</hi>&mdash;The just height of
the inundation, according to Pliny, is sixteen cubits.<note place='foot'>Justum
incrementum est cubitorum xvi. Minores aquæ non omnia rigant:
ampliores detinent tardiùs recedendo. Hæ serendi tempora absumunt solo madente:
illæ non dant sitiente. Utrumque reputat provincia. In duodecim cubitis famem
sentit, in tredecim etiamnum esurit: quatuordecim cubita hilaritatem afferunt,
quindecim securitatem, sexdecim delicias. Plin. l. v. c. 9.&mdash;Trans.</note> When it
rises but to twelve or thirteen, a famine is threatened; and
when it exceeds sixteen, there is danger. It must be remembered,
that a cubit is a foot and a half. The emperor Julian
takes notice, in a letter to Ecdicius, prefect of Egypt,<note place='foot'>Jul.
<hi rend='italic'>Epist.</hi> 50.</note> that the
height of the Nile's overflowing was fifteen cubits, the 20th of
September, in 362. The ancients do not agree entirely with
one another, nor with the moderns, with regard to the height
of the inundation; but the difference is not very considerable,
and may proceed, 1. from the disparity between the ancient
and modern measures, which it is hard to estimate on a fixed
and certain foot; 2. from the carelessness of the observers and
historians; 3. from the real difference of the Nile's increase,
which was not so great the nearer it approached the sea.
</p>

<p>
As the riches of Egypt depended on the inundation of the
Nile, all the circumstances and different degrees of its increase
had been carefully considered; and by a long series of regular
observations, made during many years, the inundation itself
discovered what kind of harvest the ensuing year was likely to
produce.<note place='foot'>Diod. l. i. p 33.</note>
The kings had placed at Memphis a measure on
which these different increases were marked; and from thence
notice was given to all the rest of Egypt, the inhabitants of
which knew, by that means, beforehand, what they might fear
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
or promise themselves from the harvest. Strabo speaks of a
well on the banks of the Nile near the town of Syene, made
for that purpose.<note place='foot'>Lib. xvii. p. 817.</note>
</p>

<p>
The same custom is observed to this day at Grand Cairo.
In the court of a mosque there stands a pillar, on which are
marked the degrees of the Nile's increase; and common criers
every day proclaim, in all parts of the city, how high it is risen.
The tribute paid to the Grand Signior for the lands, is regulated
by the inundation. The day on which it rises to a certain
height, is kept as a grand festival, and solemnized with fire-works,
feastings, and all the demonstrations of public rejoicing;
and in the remotest ages, the overflowing of the Nile was
always attended with an universal joy throughout all Egypt,
that being the fountain of its happiness.
</p>

<p>
The heathens ascribed the inundation of the Nile to their
god Serapis; and the pillar on which was marked the increase,
was preserved religiously in the temple of that idol.<note place='foot'>Socrat.
l. i. c. 18. Sozom. l. v. c. 3.</note> The
emperor Constantine having ordered it to be removed into the
church of Alexandria, the Egyptians spread a report, that the
Nile would rise no more by reason of the wrath of Serapis;
but the river overflowed and increased as usual the following
years. Julian the apostate, a zealous protector of idolatry,
caused this pillar to be replaced in the same temple, out of
which it was again removed by the command of Theodosius.
</p>

<p>
6. <hi rend='italic'>The Canals of the Nile and Spiral Pumps.</hi>&mdash;Divine
Providence, in giving so beneficent a river to Egypt, did not
thereby intend that the inhabitants of it should be idle, and
enjoy so great a blessing without taking any pains. One may
naturally suppose, that as the Nile could not of itself cover the
whole country, great labour was to be used to facilitate the
overflowing of the lands; and numberless canals cut, in order
to convey the waters to all parts. The villages, which stand
very thick on the banks of the Nile on eminences, have each
their canals, which are opened at proper times, to let the water
into the country. The more distant villages have theirs also,
even to the extremities of the kingdom. Thus the waters are
successively conveyed to the most remote places. Persons are
not permitted to cut the trenches to receive the waters, till the
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
river is at a certain height; nor to open them all at once;
because otherwise some lands would be too much overflowed,
and others not covered enough. They begin with opening
them in Upper, and afterwards in Lower Egypt, according to
the rules prescribed in a roll or book, in which all the measures
are exactly set down. By this means the water is husbanded
with such care, that it spreads itself over all the lands. The
countries overflowed by the Nile are so extensive, and lie so
low, and the number of canals so great, that of all the waters
which flow into Egypt during the months of June, July, and
August, it is believed that not a tenth part of them reaches the
sea.
</p>

<p>
But as, notwithstanding all these canals, there are still
abundance of high lands which cannot receive the benefit of
the Nile's overflowing; this want is supplied by spiral pumps,
which are turned by oxen, in order to bring the water into pipes,
which convey it to these lands. Diodorus speaks of a
similar engine invented by Archimedes in his travels into Egypt,
which is called <hi rend='italic'>Cochlea Ægyptia</hi>.<note place='foot'>Lib.
i. p. 30. &amp; lib. v. p. 313.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. <hi rend='italic'>The Fertility caused by the Nile.</hi>&mdash;There is no country
in the world where the soil is more fruitful than in Egypt;
which is owing entirely to the Nile. For whereas other rivers,
when they overflow lands, wash away and exhaust their vivific
moisture; the Nile, on the contrary, by the excellent slime it
brings along with it, fattens and enriches them in such a
manner, as sufficiently compensates for what the foregoing
harvest had impaired.<note place='foot'>Cùm cæteri amnes abluant terras et eviscerent;
Nilus adeò nihil exedit nec abradit, ut contrà adjiciat vires.&mdash;Ita juvat agros
duabus ex causis, et quòd inundat, et quòd oblimat. Senec.
<hi rend='italic'>Nat. Quæst.</hi> l. iv. c. 2.&mdash;Trans.</note>
The husbandman, in this country,
never tires himself with holding the plough, or breaking the
clods of earth. As soon as the Nile retires, he has nothing to
do but to turn up the earth, and temper it with a little sand,
in order to lessen its rankness; after which he sows it with
great ease, and with little or no expense. Two months after,
it is covered with all sorts of corn and pulse. The Egyptians
generally sow in October and November, according as the
waters draw off; and their harvest is in March and April.
</p>

<p>
The same land bears, in one year, three or four different
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
kinds of crops. Lettuces and cucumbers are sown first; then
corn; and, after harvest, several sorts of pulse which are
peculiar to Egypt. As the sun is extremely hot in this country,
and rains fall very seldom in it, it is natural to suppose that the
earth would soon be parched, and the corn and pulse burnt up
by so scorching a heat, were it not for the canals and reservoirs
with which Egypt abounds; and which, by the drains from
thence, amply supply wherewith to water and refresh the fields
and gardens.
</p>

<p>
The Nile contributes no less to the nourishment of cattle,
which is another source of wealth to Egypt. The Egyptians
begin to turn them out to grass in November, and they graze
till the end of March. Words could never express how rich
their pastures are; and how fat the flocks and herds (which,
by reason of the mildness of the air, are out night and day)
grow in a very little time. During the inundation of the Nile,
they are fed with hay and cut straw, barley and beans, which
are their common food.
</p>

<p>
A man cannot, says Corneille de Bruyn in his Travels,<note place='foot'>Vol. ii.</note>
help observing the admirable providence of God towards this
country, who sends at a fixed season such great quantities
of rain in Ethiopia, in order to water Egypt, where a shower
of rain scarce ever falls; and who, by that means, causes the
driest and most sandy soil to become the richest and most
fruitful country in the universe.
</p>

<p>
Another thing to be observed here is, that (as the inhabitants
say) in the beginning of June, and the four following months,
the north-east winds blow constantly, in order to keep back the
waters, which otherwise would draw off too fast; and to hinder
them from discharging themselves into the sea, the entrance to
which these winds bar up, as it were, from them. The ancients
have not omitted this circumstance.
</p>

<p>
The same Providence, whose ways are wonderful and
infinitely various, displayed itself after a quite different manner
in Palestine, in rendering it exceeding fruitful;<note place='foot'>Multiformis
sapientia. Eph. iii. 10.</note> not by rains,
which fall during the course of the year, as is usual in other
places; nor by a peculiar inundation like that of the Nile in
Egypt; but by sending fixed rains at two seasons, when his
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
people were obedient to him, to make them more sensible of
their continual dependence upon him. God himself commands
them, by his servant Moses, to make this reflection: <q>The
land whither thou goest in to possess it, is not as the land of
Egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou sowedst thy
seed, and wateredst it with thy foot, as a garden of herbs: but
the land whither ye go to possess it, is a land of hills and
valleys, and drinketh water of the rain of heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
xi. 10-13.</note> After this,
God promises to give his people, so long as they shall continue
obedient to him, <q>the former</q> and <q>the latter rain:</q> the
first in autumn, to bring up the corn; and the second in the
spring and summer, to make it grow and ripen.
</p>

<p>
8. <hi rend='italic'>The different Prospects exhibited by the Nile.</hi>&mdash;There
cannot be a finer sight than Egypt at two seasons of the year.
For if a man ascends some mountain, or one of the largest
pyramids of Grand Cairo, in the months of July and August,
he beholds a vast sea, in which numberless towns and villages
appear, with several causeys leading from place to place; the
whole interspersed with groves and fruit trees, whose tops only
are visible; all which forms a delightful prospect.<note place='foot'>Illa facies
pulcherrima est, cùm jam se in agros Nilus ingessit. Latent campi,
opertæque sunt valles: oppida insularum modo extant. Nullum in mediterraneis,
nisi per navigia, commercium est: majorque est lætitia in gentibus, quo minus
terrarum suarum vident. Senec. <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Quæst.</hi> l. iv. c.
2.&mdash;Trans.</note> This view
is bounded by mountains and woods, which terminate, at the
utmost distance the eye can discover, the most beautiful
horizon that can be imagined. On the contrary, in winter, that
is to say, in the months of January and February, the whole
country is like one continued scene of beautiful meadows,
whose verdure, enamelled with flowers, charms the eye. The
spectator beholds, on every side, flocks and herds dispersed
over all the plains, with infinite numbers of husbandmen and
gardeners. The air is then perfumed by the great quantity of
blossoms on the orange, lemon, and other trees; and is so
pure, that a wholesomer or more agreeable is not found in the
world; so that nature, being then dead, as it were, in all other
climates, seems to be alive only for so delightful an abode.
</p>

<p>
9. <hi rend='italic'>The Canal formed by the Nile, by which a communication
in made between the two Seas.</hi>&mdash;The canal, by which a
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
communication was made between the Red-Sea and the
Mediterranean, ought to have a place here, as it was not one
of the least advantages which the Nile procured to Egypt.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. ii. c. 158. Strab. l. xvii. p. 804. Plin l. vi.
c. 29. Diod. l. i p. 29.</note>
Sesostris, or, according to others, Psammetichus, first projected
the design, and began this work. Necho, successor to the last
prince, laid out immense sums upon it, and employed a prodigious
number of men. It is said, that above six score
thousand Egyptians perished in the undertaking. He gave it
over, terrified by an oracle, which told him that he would
thereby open a door for Barbarians (for by this name they
called all foreigners) to enter Egypt. The work was continued
by Darius, the first of that name; but he also desisted from it,
upon his being told, that as the Red-Sea lay higher than
Egypt, it would drown the whole country. But it was at last
finished under the Ptolemies, who, by the help of sluices,
opened or shut the canal as there was occasion. It began not
far from the Delta, near the town of Bubastus. It was a
hundred cubits, that is, twenty-five fathoms broad, so that two
vessels might pass with ease; it had depth enough to carry the
largest ships; and was about a thousand stadia, that is, above
fifty leagues long. This canal was of great service to the trade
of Egypt. But it is now almost filled up, and there are scarce
any remains of it to be seen.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. Lower Egypt.</head>

<p>
I am now to speak of Lower Egypt. Its shape, which
resembles a triangle, or Delta, Δ, gave occasion to its bearing
the latter name, which is that of one of the Greek letters.
Lower Egypt forms a kind of island; it begins at a place
where the Nile is divided into two large canals, through which
it empties itself into the Mediterranean: the mouth on the
right hand is called the Pelusian, and the other the Canopic,
from two cities in their neighbourhood, Pelusium and Canopus,
now called Damietta and Rosetta. Between these two large
branches, there are five others of less note. This island is the
best cultivated, the most fruitful, and the richest part of Egypt.
Its chief cities (very anciently) were Heliopolis, Heracleopolis,
Naucratis, Sais, Tanis, Canopus, Pelusium; and, in latter
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
times, Alexandria, Nicopolis, &amp;c. It was in the country of
Tanis that the Israelites dwelt.
</p>

<p>
There was at Sais,<note place='foot'>Plutar. <hi rend='italic'>de
Isid.</hi> p. 354.</note> a temple dedicated to Minerva, who is
supposed to be the same as Isis, with the following inscription:
<q>I am whatever hath been, and is, and shall be; and no mortal
hath yet pierced through the veil that shrouds me.</q>
</p>

<p>
Heliopolis, that is, the city of the sun, was so called from
a magnificent temple there dedicated to that planet.<note place='foot'>Strab. l.
xvii. p. 805. Herod l. ii. c. 73. Plin. l. x. c. 2.
Tacit. <hi rend='italic'>Ann.</hi> l. vi. c. 28.</note> Herodotus,
and other authors after him, relate some particulars
concerning the Phœnix and this temple, which, if true, would
indeed be very wonderful. Of this kind of birds, if we may
believe the ancients, there is never but one at a time in the
world. He is brought forth in Arabia, lives five or six hundred
years, and is of the size of an eagle. His head is adorned
with a shining and most beautiful crest; the feathers of his
neck are of a gold colour, and the rest of a purple; his tail is
white, intermixed with red, and his eyes sparkling like stars.
When he is old, and finds his end approaching, he builds a
nest with wood and aromatic spices, and then dies. Of his
bones and marrow, a worm is produced, out of which another
Phœnix is formed. His first care is to solemnize his parent's
obsequies, for which purpose he makes up a ball in the shape
of an egg, with abundance of perfumes of myrrh, as heavy as
he can carry, which he often essays beforehand; then he makes
a hole in it, where he deposits his parent's body, and closes it
carefully with myrrh and other perfumes. After this he takes
up the precious load on his shoulders, and flying to the altar
of the sun, in the city of Heliopolis, he there burns it.
</p>

<p>
Herodotus and Tacitus dispute the truth of some of the circumstances
of this account, but seem to suppose it true in
general. Pliny, on the contrary, in the very beginning of his
account of it, insinuates plainly enough, that he looks upon the
whole as fabulous; and this is the opinion of all modern
authors.
</p>

<p>
This ancient tradition, though grounded on an evident falsehood,
hath yet introduced into almost all languages, the custom
of giving the name of phœnix to whatever is singular and
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
uncommon in its kind: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Rara avis in
terris</foreign>, says Juvenal,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> vi.</note>
speaking of the difficulty of finding an accomplished woman in
all respects. And Seneca observes the same of a good man.<note place='foot'>Vir
bonus tam citò nec fieri potest, nec intelligi&mdash;tanquam Phœnix, semel anno
quingentesimo nascitur. <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> 40.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
What is reported of swans, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> that they never sing but in
their expiring moments, and that then they warble very melodiously,
is likewise grounded merely on a vulgar error; and
yet it is used, not only by the poets, but also by the orators,
and even the philosophers. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>O mutis quoque piscibus
donatura cycni, si libeat, sonum</foreign>,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Od.</hi>
iii. l. iv.</note> says Horace to Melpomene.
Cicero compares the excellent discourse which Crassus made
in the Senate, a few days before his death, to the melodious
singing of a dying swan: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Illa tanquam cycnea fuit divini
hominis vox et oratio.</foreign> <hi rend='italic'>De Orat.</hi> l. iii. n. 6. And
Socrates used to say, that good men ought to imitate swans, who, perceiving
by a secret instinct, and a sort of divination, what advantage
there is in death, die singing and with joy: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Providentes
quid in morte boni sit, cum cantu et voluptate moriuntur.</foreign>
<hi rend='italic'>Tusc. Qu.</hi> l. i. n. 73. I thought this short digression might be
of service to youth; and return now to my subject.
</p>

<p>
It was in Heliopolis, that an ox, under the name of Mnevis,
was worshipped as a god.<note place='foot'>Strab. l. xvii.
p. 805.</note> Cambyses, king of Persia, exercised
his sacrilegious rage on this city; burning the temples, demolishing
the palaces, and destroying the most precious monuments
of antiquity in it. There are still to be seen some obelisks
which escaped his fury; and others were brought from
thence to Rome, to which city they are an ornament even at
this day.
</p>

<p>
Alexandria, built by Alexander the Great, from whom it had
its name, vied almost in magnificence with the ancient cities
in Egypt. It stands four days' journey from Cairo, and was
formerly the chief mart of all the trade of the East. The
merchandises were unloaded at Portus Murius,<note place='foot'>Or
Myos Hormos.&mdash;Trans.</note> a town on the western coast
of the Red-Sea;<note place='foot'>Strab. l. xvi p. 781.</note>
from whence they were brought
upon camels to a town of Thebais, called Copht, and afterwards
conveyed down the Nile to Alexandria, whither merchants
resorted from all parts.
</p>

<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>

<p>
It is well known that the trade of the East hath, at all times,
enriched those who carried it on. This was the chief source
of the vast treasures that Solomon amassed, and which enabled
him to build the magnificent temple of Jerusalem. David,
by conquering Idumæa, became master of Elath and Esiongeber,
two towns situated on the eastern shore of the Red-Sea.<note place='foot'>2
Sam. viii. 14.</note>
From these two ports,<note place='foot'>1 Kings ix. 26.</note>
Solomon sent fleets to Ophir and Tarshish,
which always brought back immense riches.<note place='foot'>He got in one voyage 450
talents of gold, 2 Chron. viii. 18, which amounts to three millions two
hundred and forty thousand pounds sterling. Prid. <hi rend='italic'>Connect.</hi>, vol. i.
<hi rend='italic'>ad ann.</hi> 740, <hi rend='italic'>not.</hi>&mdash;Trans.</note> This
traffic, after having been enjoyed some time by the Syrians,
who regained Idumæa, passed from them into the hands of the
Tyrians. These got all their merchandise conveyed, by the
way of Rhinocolura (a sea-port town lying between the confines
of Egypt and Palestine) to Tyre, from whence they distributed
them all over the western world.<note place='foot'>Strab. l. xvi.
p. 481.</note> Hereby the Tyrians
enriched themselves exceedingly, under the Persian empire,
by the favour and protection of whose monarchs they had the
full possession of this trade. But when the Ptolemies had
made themselves masters of Egypt, they soon drew all this
trade into their kingdom, by building Berenice and other ports
on the western side of the Red-Sea, belonging to Egypt; and
fixed their chief mart at Alexandria, which thereby rose to be
the city of the greatest trade in the world. There it continued
for a great many centuries after; and all the traffic which the
western parts of the world from that time had with Persia,
India, Arabia, and the eastern coasts of Africa, was wholly
carried on through the Red-Sea and the mouth of the Nile,
till a way was discovered, a little above two hundred years
since, of sailing to those parts by the Cape of Good Hope.
After this, the Portuguese for some time were masters of this
trade; but now it is in a manner engrossed wholly by the
English and Dutch. This short account of the East-India
trade, from Solomon's time, to the present age, is extracted
from Dr. Prideaux.<note place='foot'>Part I. i. p. 9.</note>
</p>

<p>
For the convenience of trade, there was built near Alexandria,
in an island called Pharos, a tower which bore the same
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
name.<note place='foot'>Strab. l. xvii. p. 791. Plin. l. xxxvi.
c. 12.</note> At the top of this tower was kept a fire, to light such
ships as sailed by night near those dangerous coasts, which
were full of sands and shelves, from whence all other towers,
designed for the same use, have derived their name, as, Pharo
di Messina, &amp;c. The famous architect Sostratus built it by
order of Ptolemy Philadelphus, who expended eight hundred
talents upon it.<note place='foot'>Eight hundred thousand crowns,
or 180,000<hi rend='italic'>l</hi>. sterling.&mdash;Trans.</note>
It was reckoned one of the seven wonders of
the world. Some, through a mistake, have commended that
prince, for permitting the architect to put his name in the inscription,
which was fixed on the tower, instead of his own.<note place='foot'>Magno
animo Ptolemæi regis, quòd in eà permiserit Sostrati Cnidii architecti
structuræ nomen inscribi. Plin.&mdash;Trans.</note>
It was very short and plain, according to the manner of the
ancients. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sostratus Cnidius Dexiphanis F. Diis
Servatoribus pro navigantibus</foreign>: <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> Sostratus the
Cnidian, son of Dexiphanes, to the protecting deities, for the use of sea-faring
people. But certainly Ptolemy must have very much undervalued
that kind of immortality which princes are generally so
fond of, to suffer, that his name should not be so much as
mentioned in the inscription of an edifice so capable of immortalizing
him. What we read in Lucian concerning this matter,
deprives Ptolemy of a modesty, which indeed would be very
ill placed here.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De scribend.
Hist.</hi> p. 706.</note> This author informs us that Sostratus, to
engross in after-times the whole glory of that noble structure
to himself, caused the inscription with his own name to be
carved in the marble, which he afterwards covered with lime,
and thereon put the king's name. The lime soon mouldered
away; and by that means, instead of procuring the architect
the honour with which he had flattered himself, served only to
discover to future ages his mean fraud and ridiculous vanity.
</p>

<p>
Riches failed not to bring into this city, as they usually do
in all places, luxury and licentiousness; so that the Alexandrian
voluptuousness became a proverb.<note place='foot'>Ne Alexandrinis
quidem permittenda deliciis. Quintil.&mdash;Trans.</note> In this city arts and
sciences were also industriously cultivated, witness that stately
edifice, surnamed the Museum, where the literati used to meet,
and were maintained at the public expense; and the famous
library, which was augmented considerably by Ptolemy Philadelphus;
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
and which, by the magnificence of the kings his successors,
at last contained seven hundred thousand volumes.
In Cæsar's wars with the Alexandrians, part of this library,
(situate in the Bruchion,<note place='foot'>A quarter or division of the city of
Alexandria.&mdash;Trans.</note>) which consisted of four hundred
thousand volumes, was unhappily consumed by fire.<note place='foot'>Plut.
<hi rend='italic'>in Cæs.</hi> p. 731. Seneca, <hi rend='italic'>de Tranquill.
Amm.</hi> c. 9.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Part The Second. Of the Manners and Customs.'/>
<head>Part The Second.
Of the Manners and Customs of the Egyptians.</head>

<p>
Egypt was ever considered, by all the ancients, as the
most renowned school for wisdom and politics, and the source
from whence most arts and sciences were derived. This kingdom
bestowed its noblest labours and finest arts on the improvement
of mankind; and Greece was so sensible of this,
that its most illustrious men, as Homer, Pythagoras, Plato;
even its great legislators, Lycurgus and Solon, with many
more whom it is needless to mention, travelled into Egypt,
to complete their studies, and draw from that fountain whatever
was most rare and valuable in every kind of learning.
God himself has given this kingdom a glorious testimony,
when praising Moses, he says of him, that <q>He was learned
in all the wisdom of the Egyptians.</q><note place='foot'>Acts vii. 22.</note>
</p>

<p>
To give some idea of the manners and customs of Egypt, I
shall confine myself principally to these particulars: its kings
and government; priests and religion; soldiers and war;
sciences, arts, and trades.
</p>

<p>
The reader must not be surprised if he sometimes finds, in
the customs I take notice of, a kind of contradiction. This
circumstance is owing either to the difference of countries and
nations, which did not always follow the same usages; or to
the different way of thinking of the historians whom I copy.
</p>

<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Concerning The Kings And Government.</head>

<p>
The Egyptians were the first people who rightly understood
the rules of government. A nation so grave and serious immediately
perceived, that the true end of politics is, to make
life easy, and a people happy.
</p>

<p>
The kingdom was hereditary; but, according to Diodorus,<note place='foot'>Diod.
l. i. p. 63, &amp;c.</note>
the Egyptian princes conducted themselves in a different
manner from what is usually seen in other monarchies,
where the prince acknowledges no other rule of his actions
than his own arbitrary will and pleasure. But here, kings
were under greater restraint from the laws than their subjects.
They had some particular ones digested by a former monarch,
that composed part of what the Egyptians called the sacred
books. Thus every thing being settled by ancient custom, they
never sought to live in a different way from their ancestors.
</p>

<p>
No slave nor foreigner was admitted into the immediate
service of the prince; such a post was too important to be
intrusted to any persons, except those who were the most distinguished
by their birth, and had received the most excellent
education; to the end that, as they had the liberty of approaching
the king's person day and night, he might, from men so
qualified, hear nothing which was unbecoming the royal majesty;
nor have any sentiments instilled into him but such as
were of a noble and generous kind. For, adds Diodorus, it is
very rarely seen that kings fly out into any vicious excess,
unless those who approach them approve their irregularities,
or serve as instruments to their passions.
</p>

<p>
The kings of Egypt freely permitted, not only the quality
and proportion of what they ate and drank to be prescribed
them, (a thing customary in Egypt, whose inhabitants were all
sober, and whose air inspired frugality,) but even that all their
hours, and almost every action, should be under the regulation
of the laws.
</p>

<p>
In the morning at day break, when the head is clearest, and
the thoughts most unperplexed, they read the several letters
they received; to form a more just and distinct idea of the
affairs which were to come under their consideration that day.
</p>

<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>

<p>
As soon as they were dressed, they went to the daily sacrifice
performed in the temple; where, surrounded with their
whole court, and the victims placed before the altar, they assisted
at the prayer pronounced aloud by the high priest, in
which he asked of the gods, health and all other blessings for
the king, because he governed his people with clemency and
justice, and made the laws of his kingdom the rule and standard
of his actions. The high priest entered into a long detail
of his royal virtues; observing, that he was religious to the
gods, affable to men, moderate, just, magnanimous, sincere;
an enemy to falsehood; liberal; master of his passions;
punishing crimes with the utmost lenity, but boundless in
rewarding merit. He next spoke of the faults which kings
might be guilty of; but supposed at the same time that they
never committed any, except by surprise or ignorance; and
loaded with imprecations such of their ministers as gave them
ill council, and suppressed or disguised the truth. Such were
the methods of conveying instruction to their kings. It was
thought that reproaches would only sour their tempers; and
that the most effectual method to inspire them with virtue,
would be to point out to them their duty in praises conformable
to the sense of the laws, and pronounced in a solemn
manner before the gods. After the prayers and sacrifices were
ended, the councils and actions of great men were read to the
king out of the sacred books, in order that he might govern his
dominions according to their maxims, and maintain the laws
which had made his predecessors and their subjects so happy.
</p>

<p>
I have already observed, that the quantity as well as quality
of what he ate or drank were prescribed, by the laws, to the
king: his table was covered with nothing but the most common
food; because eating in Egypt was designed, not to
tickle the palate, but to satisfy the cravings of nature. One
would have concluded, (observes the historian,) that these
rules had been laid down by some able physician, who was
attentive only to the health of the prince, rather than by a
legislator. The same simplicity was seen in all other things;
and we read in Plutarch of a temple in Thebes, which had
one of its pillars inscribed with imprecations against that king
who first introduced profusion and luxury into
Egypt.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Isid. et Osir.</hi> p. 354.</note>
</p>

<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>

<p>
The principal duty of kings, and their most essential function,
is the administering justice to their subjects. Accordingly
the kings of Egypt cultivated more immediately this duty;
convinced that on this depended not only the ease and comfort
of individuals, but the happiness of the state; which
would be a herd of robbers rather than a kingdom, should the
weak be unprotected, and the powerful enabled by their riches
and influence to commit crimes with impunity.
</p>

<p>
Thirty judges were selected out of the principal cities, to
form a body for dispensing justice through the whole kingdom.
The prince, in filling these vacancies, chose such as were
most renowned for their honesty; and put at their head, him
who was most distinguished for his knowledge and love of the
laws, and was had in the most universal esteem. They had
revenues assigned them, to the end that, being freed from domestic
cares, they might devote their whole time to the execution
of the laws. Thus honourably maintained by the generosity
of the prince, they administered gratuitously to the
people, that justice to which they have a natural right, and
which ought to be equally open to all; and, in some sense, to
the poor more than the rich, because the latter find a support
within themselves; whereas the very condition of the former
exposes them more to injuries, and therefore calls louder for
the protection of the laws. To guard against surprise, affairs
were transacted by writing in the assemblies of these judges.
That false eloquence was dreaded, which dazzles the mind, and
moves the passions. Truth could not be expressed with too
much plainness, as it alone was to have the sway in judgments;
because in that alone the rich and poor, the powerful and weak,
the learned and the ignorant, were to find relief and security.
The president of this senate wore a collar of gold set with precious
stones, at which hung a figure represented blind, this
being called the emblem of truth. When the president put
this collar on, it was understood as a signal to enter upon business.
He touched the party with it who was to gain his cause,
and this was the form of passing sentence.
</p>

<p>
The most excellent circumstance in the laws of the Egyptians,
was, that every individual, from his infancy, was nurtured
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
in the strictest observance of them. A new custom in Egypt
was a kind of miracle.<note place='foot'>Plat. <hi rend='italic'>in
Tim.</hi> p. 656.</note> All things there ran in the old channel;
and the exactness with which little matters were adhered to,
preserved those of more importance; and consequently no
nation ever retained their laws and customs longer than the
Egyptians.
</p>

<p>
Wilful murder was punished with death,<note place='foot'>Diod.
l. i. p. 70.</note> whatever might
be the condition of the murdered person, whether he was free-born
or otherwise. In this the humanity and equity of the
Egyptians were superior to that of the Romans, who gave the
master an absolute power of life and death over his slave.
The emperor Adrian, indeed, abolished this law; from an opinion,
that an abuse of this nature ought to be reformed, let its
antiquity or authority be ever so great.
</p>

<p>
Perjury was also punished with death,<note place='foot'>Pag.
69.</note> because that crime
attacks both the gods, whose majesty is trampled upon by
invoking their name to a false oath, and men, by breaking
the strongest tie of human society, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> sincerity and veracity.
</p>

<p>
The false accuser was condemned to undergo the punishment
which the person accused was to have suffered, had the
accusation been proved.<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>
</p>

<p>
He who had neglected or refused to save a man's life
when attacked, if it was in his power to assist him, was punished
as rigorously as the assassin:<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note> but if the unfortunate
person could not be succoured, the offender was at least to be impeached;
and penalties were decreed for any neglect of this
kind. Thus the subjects were a guard and protection to one
another; and the whole body of the community united against
the designs of the bad.
</p>

<p>
No man was allowed to be useless to the state;<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note> but every
one was obliged to enter his name and place of abode in a
public register, that remained in the hands of the magistrate,
and to describe his profession, and his means of support. If
he gave a false account of himself, he was immediately put to
death.
</p>

<p>
To prevent borrowing of money, the parent of sloth,
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
frauds, and chicane, king Asychis made a very judicious law.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. ii. c. 136</note>
The wisest and best regulated states, as Athens and Rome,
ever found insuperable difficulties, in contriving a just medium,
to restrain, on one hand, the cruelty of the creditor in the
exaction of his loan; and on the other, the knavery of the
debtor, who refused or neglected to pay his debts. Now
Egypt took a wise course on this occasion; and, without doing
any injury to the personal liberty of its inhabitants, or ruining
their families, pursued the debtor with incessant fears of infamy
in case he were dishonest. No man was permitted to borrow
money without pawning to the creditor the body of his father,
which every Egyptian embalmed with great care; and kept
reverentially in his house, (as will be observed in the sequel,)
and therefore might be easily moved from one place to another.
But it was equally impious and infamous not to redeem
soon so precious a pledge; and he who died without having
discharged this duty, was deprived of the customary honours
paid to the dead.<note place='foot'>This law put the whole
sepulchre of the debtor into the power of the creditor,
who removed to his own house the body of the father: the debtor refusing to discharge
his obligation, was to be deprived of burial, either in his father's sepulchre or
any other; and whilst he lived, he was not permitted to bury any person descended
from him. Μηδὲ αὐτῷ ἐκείνῳ τελευτήσαντι εἶναι ταφῆς κυρῆσαι&mdash;μήτ᾽ ἄλλον
μηδένα τὸν ἑαυτοῦ ἀπὸ γενόμενον θάψαι.
Herod.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
Diodorus remarks an error committed by some of the
Grecian legislators.<note place='foot'>Diod. l. i. p.
71.</note> They forbid, for instance, the taking
away (to satisfy debts) the horses, ploughs, and other implements
of husbandry employed by peasants; judging it inhuman
to reduce, by this security, these poor men to an impossibility
of discharging their debts, and getting their bread: but,
at the same time, they permitted the creditor to imprison the
peasants themselves, who alone were capable of using these
implements, which exposed them to the same inconveniences,
and at the same time deprived the government of persons who
belong, and are necessary, to it; who labour for the public emolument,
and over whose person no private man has any right.
</p>

<p>
Polygamy was allowed in Egypt, except to the priests, who
could marry but one woman.<note place='foot'>Ibid. p.
72.</note> Whatever was the condition of
the woman, whether she was free or a slave, her children were
deemed free and legitimate.
</p>

<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>

<p>
One custom that was practised in Egypt, shows the profound
darkness into which such nations as were most celebrated
for their wisdom have been plunged; and this is the
marriage of brothers with their sisters, which was not only
authorized by the laws, but even, in some measure, originated
from their religion, from the example and practice of such of
their gods as had been the most anciently and universally
adored in Egypt, that is, Osiris and Isis.<note place='foot'>Diod. l. i. p. 22.</note>
</p>

<p>
A very great respect was there paid to old age.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. ii. c. 20.</note> The
young were obliged to rise up for the old; and on every occasion,
to resign to them the most honourable seat. The Spartans
borrowed this law from the Egyptians.
</p>

<p>
The virtue in the highest esteem among the Egyptians, was
gratitude. The glory which has been given them of being the
most grateful of all men, shows that they were the best formed
of any nation for social life. Benefits are the band of concord,
both public and private. He who acknowledges favours,
loves to confer them; and in banishing ingratitude, the pleasure
of doing good remains so pure and engaging, that it is
impossible for a man to be insensible of it. But it was particularly
towards their kings that the Egyptians prided themselves
on evincing their gratitude. They honoured them whilst
living, as so many visible representations of the Deity; and
after their death lamented for them as the fathers of their
country. These sentiments of respect and tenderness proceeded
from a strong persuasion, that the Divinity himself had
placed them upon the throne, as he distinguished them so
greatly from all other mortals; and that kings bore the most
noble characteristics of the Supreme Being, as the power and
will of doing good to others were united in their persons.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. Concerning the Priests And Religion
Of The Egyptians.</head>

<p>
Priests, in Egypt, held the second rank to kings. They had
great privileges and revenues; their lands were exempted from
all imposts; of which some traces are seen in Genesis, where
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
it is said, <q>Joseph made it a law over the land of Egypt, that
Pharaoh should have the fifth part, except the land of the
priests only, which became not Pharaoh's.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. xlvii. 26.</note>
</p>

<p>
The prince usually honoured them with a large share in his
confidence and government, because they, of all his subjects,
had received the best education, had acquired the greatest
knowledge, and were most strongly attached to the king's person
and the good of the public. They were at one and the
same time the depositaries of religion and of the sciences;
and to this circumstance was owing the great respect which
was paid them by the natives as well as foreigners, by whom
they were alike consulted upon the most sacred things relating
to the mysteries of religion, and the most profound subjects in
the several sciences.
</p>

<p>
The Egyptians pretend to be the first institutors of festivals
and processions in honour of the gods.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. ii. c. 60.</note> One festival was celebrated
in the city of Bubastus, whither persons resorted from all
parts of Egypt, and upwards of seventy thousand, besides children,
were seen at it. Another, surnamed the feast of the lights,
was solemnized at Sais. All persons, throughout Egypt, who
did not go to Sais, were obliged to illuminate their windows.
</p>

<p>
Different animals were sacrificed in different countries,
but one common and general ceremony was observed in all
sacrifices, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> the laying of hands upon the head of the victim,
loading it at the same time with imprecations; and praying
the gods to divert upon that victim all the calamities which
might threaten Egypt.<note place='foot'>Ibid. c. 39.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is to Egypt that Pythagoras owed his favourite doctrine
of the Metempsychosis or transmigration of souls.<note place='foot'>Diod.
l. i. p. 88.</note> The Egyptians
believed, that at the death of men their souls transmigrated
into other human bodies; and that, if they had been
vicious, they were imprisoned in the bodies of unclean or ill-conditioned
beasts, to expiate in them their past transgressions;
and that after a revolution of some centuries they again
animated other human bodies.
</p>

<p>
The priests had the possession of the sacred books, which
contained, at large, the principles of government, as well as the
mysteries of divine worship. Both were uncommonly involved
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
in symbols and enigmas, which, under these veils, made truth
more venerable, and excited more strongly the curiosity of
men.<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>de Isid. et
Osir.</hi> p. 354.</note> The figure of Harpocrates, in the Egyptian sanctuaries,
with his finger upon his mouth, seemed to intimate, that mysteries
were there enclosed, the knowledge of which was revealed
to very few. The sphinxes, placed at the entrance of all
temples, implied the same. It is very well known that pyramids,
obelisks, pillars, statues, in a word, all public monuments,
were usually adorned with hieroglyphics; that is, with symbolical
writings; whether these were characters unknown to
the vulgar, or figures of animals, under which was couched a
hidden and parabolical meaning. Thus, by a hare, was signified
a lively and piercing attention, because this creature has a
very delicate sense of hearing.<note place='foot'>Plut.
<hi rend='italic'>Sympos.</hi> l. iv. p. 670</note> The statue of a judge without
hands, and with eyes fixed upon the ground, symbolized the
duties of those who were to exercise the judiciary functions.<note place='foot'>Id.
<hi rend='italic'>de Isid.</hi> p. 355.</note>
</p>

<p>
It would require a volume to treat fully of the religion of the
Egyptians. But I shall confine myself to two articles, which
form the principal part of it; and these are the worship of the
different deities, and the ceremonies relating to funerals.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sect. I. The Worship of the various Deities.</hi>&mdash;Never
were any people more superstitious than the Egyptians; they
had a great number of gods, of different orders and degrees,
which I shall omit, because they belong more to fable than to
history. Among the rest, two were universally adored in that
country, and these were Osiris and Isis, which are thought to
be the sun and moon; and, indeed, the worship of those planets
gave rise to idolatry.
</p>

<p>
Besides these gods, the Egyptians worshipped a great number
of beasts; as the ox, the dog, the wolf, the hawk, the crocodile,
the ibis,<note place='foot'>Or Egyptian stork.&mdash;Trans.</note>
the cat, &amp;c. Many of these beasts were the
objects of the superstition only of some particular cities; and
whilst one people worshipped one species of animals as gods,
their neighbours held the same animals in abomination. This
was the source of the continual wars which were carried on
between one city and another; and this was owing to the false
policy of one of their kings, who, to deprive them of the opportunity
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
and means of conspiring against the state, endeavoured
to draw off their attention, by engaging them in religious contests.
I call this a false and mistaken policy; because it
directly thwarts the true spirit of government, the aim of which
is, to unite all its members in the strictest ties, and to make all
its strength consist in the perfect harmony of its several parts.
</p>

<p>
Every nation had a great zeal for their gods. <q>Among us,</q>
says Cicero,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Nat. Deor.</hi>
l. i. n. 82. <hi rend='italic'>Tusc. Quæst.</hi> l. v. n. 78.</note>
<q>it is very common to see temples robbed, and
statues carried off, but it was never known that any person in
Egypt ever abused a crocodile, an ibis, a cat; for its inhabitants
would have suffered the most, extreme torments, rather
than be guilty of such sacrilege.</q> It was death for any person
to kill one of these animals voluntarily; and even a punishment
was decreed against him who should have killed an ibis, or cat,
with or without design.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. ii. c.
65.</note> Diodorus relates an incident,<note place='foot'>Diod.
l. i. p. 74. 75.</note> to which
he himself was an eye-witness during his stay in Egypt. A Roman
having inadvertently, and without design, killed a cat, the
exasperated populace ran to his house; and neither the authority
of the king, who immediately detached a body of his guards,
nor the terror of the Roman name, could rescue the unfortunate
criminal. And such was the reverence which the Egyptians
had for these animals, that in an extreme famine they
chose to eat one another, rather than feed upon their imagined
deities.
</p>

<p>
Of all these animals, the bull Apis, called Epaphus by the
Greeks, was the most famous.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. iii.
c. 27, &amp;c. Diod. l. i. p. 76. Plin. l. viii. c. 46.</note> Magnificent temples were
erected to him; extraordinary honours were paid him while he
lived, and still greater after his death. Egypt went then into
a general mourning. His obsequies were solemnized with
such a pomp as is hardly credible. In the reign of Ptolemy
Lagus, the bull Apis dying of old age,<note place='foot'>Pliny affirms,
that he was not allowed to exceed a certain term of years; and
was drowned in the priests' well. Non est fas eum certos vitæ excedere annos,
mersumque in sacerdotum fonte enecant. <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi>
l. viii. c. 46.&mdash;Trans.</note> the funeral pomp, besides
the ordinary expenses, amounted to upwards of fifty
thousand French crowns.<note place='foot'>Above
11,250<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> sterling.&mdash;Trans.</note>
After the last honours had been
paid to the deceased god, the next care was to provide him a
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
successor; and all Egypt was sought through for that purpose.
He was known by certain signs, which distinguished him from
all other animals of that species; upon his forehead was to be
a white spot, in form of a crescent; on his back, the figure of
an eagle; upon his tongue, that of a beetle. As soon as he
was found, mourning gave place to joy; and nothing was heard,
in all parts of Egypt, but festivals and rejoicings. The new
god was brought to Memphis, to take possession of his dignity,
and there installed with a great number of ceremonies. The
reader will find hereafter, that Cambyses, at his return from his
unfortunate expedition against Ethiopia, finding all the Egyptians
in transports of joy for the discovery of their new god
Apis, and imagining that this was intended as an insult upon
his misfortunes, killed, in the first impulse of his fury, the
young bull, who, by that means, had but a short enjoyment of
his divinity.
</p>

<p>
It is plain, that the golden calf set up near mount Sinai by
the Israelites, was owing to their abode in Egypt, and an imitation
of the god Apis; as well as those which were afterwards
set up by Jeroboam (who had resided a considerable time in
Egypt) in the two extremities of the kingdom of Israel.
</p>

<p>
The Egyptians, not contented with offering incense to animals,
carried their folly to such an excess, as to ascribe a divinity
to the pulse and roots of their gardens. For this they are ingeniously
reproached by the satirist:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Who has not heard where Egypt's realms are nam'd,</l>
<l>What monster-gods her frantic sons have fram'd?</l>
<l>Here Ibis gorg'd with well-grown serpents, there</l>
<l>The Crocodile commands religious fear:</l>
<l>Where Memnon's statue magic strings inspire</l>
<l>With vocal sounds, that emulate the lyre;</l>
<l>And Thebes, such, Fate, are thy disastrous turns!</l>
<l>Now prostrate o'er her pompous ruins mourns;</l>
<l>A monkey-god, prodigious to be told!</l>
<l>Strikes the beholder's eye with burnish'd gold:</l>
<l>To godship here blue Triton's scaly herd,</l>
<l>The river-progeny is there preferr'd:</l>
<l>Through towns Diana's power neglected lies,</l>
<l>Where to her dogs aspiring temples rise:</l>
<l>And should you leeks or onions eat, no time</l>
<l>Would expiate the sacrilegious crime</l>
<l>Religious nations sure, and blest abodes,</l>
<l>Where ev'ry orchard is o'errun with gods.<note place='foot'><p>Quis
nescit, Volusi Bithynice, qualia demens<lb/>
Ægyptus portenta colat? Crocodilon adorat<lb/>
Pars hæc: illa pavet saturam serpentibus Ibin.<lb/>
Effigies sacri nitet aurea Cercopitheci,<lb/>
Dimidio magicæ resonant ubi Memnone chordæ,<lb/>
Atque vetus Thebe centum jacet obruta portis.<lb/>
Illic cœruleos, hic piscem fluminis, illic<lb/>
Oppida tota canem venerantur, nemo Dianam.<lb/>
Porrum et cœpe nefas violare, ac frangere morsu.<lb/>
O sanctas gentes, quibus hæc nascuntur in hortis<lb/>
Numina!
</p>
<p>
Juven. <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> xv.&mdash;Trans.</p></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>

<p>
It is astonishing to see a nation, which boasted its superiority
above all others with regard to wisdom and learning, thus
blindly abandon itself to the most gross and ridiculous superstitions.
Indeed, to read of animals and vile insects, honoured
with religious worship, placed in temples, and maintained with
great care, and at an extravagant expense;<note place='foot'>Diodorus affirms,
that in his time, the expense amounted to no less than one
hundred thousand crowns, or 22,500<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> sterling.
Lib. i. p. 76.&mdash;Trans.</note> to read, that those
who murdered them were punished with death; and that these
animals were embalmed, and solemnly deposited in tombs assigned
them by the public; to hear that this extravagance was
carried to such lengths, as that leeks and onions were acknowledged
as deities; were invoked in necessity, and depended
upon for succour and protection; are absurdities which we, at
this distance of time, can scarce believe; and yet they have
the evidence of all antiquity. <q>You enter,</q> says
Lucian,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Imag.</hi></note> <q>into
a magnificent temple, every part of which glitters with gold
and silver. You there look attentively for a god, and are
cheated with a stork, an ape, or a cat;</q> <q>a just emblem,</q> adds
that author, <q>of too many palaces, the masters of which are
far from being the brightest ornaments of them.</q>
</p>

<p>
Several reasons are assigned for the worship paid to animals
by the Egyptians.<note place='foot'>Diod. l. i. p. 77, &amp;c.</note>
</p>

<p>
The first is drawn from fabulous history. It is pretended
that the gods, in a rebellion made against them by men, fled
into Egypt, and there concealed themselves under the form of
different animals; and that this gave birth to the worship which
was afterwards paid to those animals.
</p>

<p>
The second is taken from the benefit which these several
animals procure to mankind:<note place='foot'>Ipsi qui irridentur
Ægyptii, nullam belluam nisi ob aliquam utilitatem, quam
ex eâ caperent, consecraverunt. Cic. lib. i.
<hi rend='italic'>De Nat. Deor.</hi> n. 101.&mdash;Trans.</note>
oxen by their labour; sheep by
their wool and milk; dogs by their service in hunting, and
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
guarding houses, whence the god Anubis was represented with
a dog's head: the ibis, a bird very much resembling a stork,
was worshipped, because he put to flight the winged serpents,
with which Egypt would otherwise have been grievously infested;
the crocodile, an amphibious creature, that is, living
alike upon land and water, of a surprising strength and size,<note place='foot'>Which,
according to Herodotus, is more than 17 cubits in length: l. ii. c.
68.&mdash;Trans.</note> was worshipped, because he defended Egypt from the incursions
of the wild Arabs; the ichneumon was adored, because
he prevented the too great increase of crocodiles, which might
have proved destructive to Egypt. Now the little animal in
question does this service to the country two ways. First, it
watches the time when the crocodile is absent, and breaks his
eggs, but does not eat them. Secondly, when the crocodile is
asleep upon the banks of the Nile, (and he always sleeps with
his mouth open,) the ichneumon, which lies concealed in the
mud, leaps at once into his mouth; gets down to his entrails,
which he gnaws; then piercing his belly, the skin of which is
very tender, he escapes with safety; and thus, by his address
and subtilty, returns victorious over so terrible an animal.
</p>

<p>
Philosophers, not satisfied with reasons which were too
trifling to account for such strange absurdities as dishonoured
the heathen system, and at which themselves secretly blushed,
have, since the establishment of Christianity, supposed a third
reason for the worship which the Egyptians paid to animals,
and declared, that it was not offered to the animals themselves,
but to the gods, of whom they are symbols. Plutarch, in his
treatise where he examines professedly the pretensions of Isis
and Osiris, the two most famous deities of the Egyptians, says
as follows:<note place='foot'>P. 382.</note> <q>Philosophers
honour the image of God wherever
they find it, even in inanimate beings, and consequently more
in those which have life. We are therefore to approve, not
the worshippers of these animals, but those who, by their
means, ascend to the Deity; they are to be considered as so
many mirrors, which nature holds forth, and in which the Supreme
Being displays himself in a wonderful manner; or, as
so many instruments, which he makes use of to manifest outwardly
his incomprehensible wisdom. Should men therefore,
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
for the embellishing of statues, amass together all the gold and
precious stones in the world; the worship must not be referred
to the statues, for the Deity does not exist in colours artfully
disposed, nor in frail matter destitute of sense and motion.</q>
Plutarch says in the same treatise,<note place='foot'>P. 377 and
378.</note> <q>that as the sun and moon,
heaven, earth, and the sea, are common to all men, but have
different names, according to the difference of nations and languages;
in like manner, though there is but one Deity, and
one providence which governs the universe, and which has
several subaltern ministers under it; men give to the Deity,
which is the same, different names, and pay it different honours,
according to the laws and customs of every country.</q>
</p>

<p>
But were these reflections, which offer the most rational
vindication that can be suggested of idolatrous worship, sufficient
to cover the absurdity of it; could it be called a raising of the
divine attributes in a suitable manner, to direct the worshipper
to admire and seek for the image of them in beasts of the most
vile and contemptible kinds, as crocodiles, serpents, and cats?
Was not this rather degrading and debasing the Deity, of whom
even the most stupid usually entertain a much greater and
more august idea?
</p>

<p>
And even these philosophers were not always so just, as to
ascend from sensible beings to their invisible Author. The
Scriptures tell us, that these pretended sages deserved, on account
of their pride and ingratitude, to be <q>given over to a
reprobate mind; and whilst they professed themselves wise, to
become fools, for having changed the glory of the incorruptible
God, into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds,
and four-footed beasts, and creeping things.</q><note place='foot'>Rom.
i. ver. 22, 25.</note> To show what
man is when left to himself, God permitted that very nation,
which had carried human wisdom to its greatest height, to be
the theatre in which the most ridiculous and absurd idolatry
was acted. And, on the other side, to display the almighty
power of his grace, he converted the frightful deserts of Egypt
into a terrestrial paradise; by peopling them, in the time appointed
by his providence, with numberless multitudes of
illustrious hermits, whose fervent piety and rigorous penance
have done so much honour to the Christian religion. I cannot
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
not forbear giving here a famous instance of it; and I hope
the reader will excuse this kind of digression.
</p>

<p>
<q>The great wonder of Lower Egypt,</q> says Abbé Fleury, in
his Ecclesiastical History,<note place='foot'>Tom. v. pp. 25,
26.</note> <q>was the city of Oxyrinchus, peopled
with monks, both within and without, so that they were
more numerous than its other inhabitants. The public edifices
and idol temples had been converted into monasteries, and
these likewise were more in number than the private houses.
The monks lodged even over the gates and in the towers.
The people had twelve churches to assemble in, exclusive of
the oratories belonging to the monasteries. There were twenty
thousand virgins and ten thousand monks in this city, every
part of which echoed night and day with the praises of God.
By order of the magistrates, sentinels were posted at the gates,
to take notice of all strangers and poor who came into the
city; and the inhabitants vied with each other who should
first receive them, in order to have an opportunity of exercising
their hospitality towards them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sect. II. The Ceremonies of the Egyptian Funerals.</hi>&mdash;I
shall now give a concise account of the funeral ceremonies
of the Egyptians.
</p>

<p>
The honours which have been paid in all ages and nations
to the bodies of the dead, and the religious care which has
always been taken of sepulchres, seem to insinuate an universal
persuasion, that bodies were lodged in sepulchres merely
as a deposit or trust.
</p>

<p>
We have already observed, in our mention of the pyramids,
with what magnificence sepulchres were built in Egypt for,
besides that they were erected as so many sacred monuments,
destined to transmit to future times the memory of great
princes; they were likewise considered as the mansions where
the body was to remain during a long succession of ages:
whereas common houses were called inns, in which men
were to abide only as travellers, and that during the course of
a life which was too short to engage their affections.
</p>

<p>
When any person in a family died, all the kindred and
friends quitted their usual habits, and put on mourning, and
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
abstained from baths, wine, and dainties of every kind. This
mourning continued forty or seventy days, probably according
to the quality of the person.
</p>

<p>
Bodies were embalmed three different ways.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. ii. c. 85, &amp;c.</note> The most
magnificent was bestowed on persons of distinguished rank,
and the expense amounted to a talent of silver, or three thousand
French livres.<note place='foot'>About 137<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>
10<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi> sterling.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
Many hands were employed in this ceremony.<note place='foot'>Diod. l. i. p. 81.</note>
Some drew the brain through the nostrils, by an instrument made for that
purpose. Others emptied the bowels and intestines, by cutting
a hole in the side, with an Ethiopian stone that was as sharp
as a razor; after which the cavities were filled with perfumes
and various odoriferous drugs. As this evacuation (which was
necessarily attended with some dissections) seemed in some
measure cruel and inhuman, the persons employed fled as
soon as the operation was over, and were pursued with stones
by the standers-by. But those who embalmed the body were
honourably treated. They filled it with myrrh, cinnamon, and
all sorts of spices. After a certain time, the body was swathed
in lawn fillets, which were glued together with a kind of very
thin gum, and then crusted over with the most exquisite perfumes.
By this means, it is said, that the entire figure of the
body, the very lineaments of the face, and even the hairs on
the lids and eye-brows were preserved in their natural perfection.
The body, thus embalmed, was delivered to the relations,
who shut it up in a kind of open chest, fitted exactly to the
size of the corpse; then they placed it upright against the wall,
either in their sepulchres (if they had any) or in their houses.
These embalmed bodies are what we now call Mummies, which
are still brought from Egypt, and are found in the cabinets of
the curious. This shows the care which the Egyptians took
of their dead. Their gratitude to their deceased relations was
immortal. Children, by seeing the bodies of their ancestors
thus preserved, recalled to mind those virtues for which the
public had honoured them; and were excited to a love of those
laws which such excellent persons had left for their security.
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
We find that part of these ceremonies were performed in the
funeral honours paid to Joseph in Egypt.
</p>

<p>
I have said that the public recognised the virtues of deceased
persons, because that, before they could be admitted into the
sacred asylum of the tomb, they underwent a solemn trial.
And this circumstance in the Egyptian funerals, is one of the
most remarkable to be found in ancient history.
</p>

<p>
It was a consolation among the heathens, to a dying man,
to leave a good name behind him; and they imagined that this
is the only human blessing of which death cannot deprive us.
But the Egyptians would not suffer praises to be bestowed
indiscriminately on all deceased persons. This honour was to
be obtained only from the public voice. The assembly of the
judges met on the other side of a lake, which they crossed in a
boat. He who sat at the helm was called Charon, in the
Egyptian language; and this first gave the hint to Orpheus,
who had been in Egypt, and after him, to the other Greeks,
to invent the fiction of Charon's boat. As soon as a man was
dead, he was brought to his trial. The public accuser was
heard. If he proved that the deceased had led a bad life, his
memory was condemned, and he was deprived of burial. The
people admired the power of the laws, which extended even
beyond the grave; and every one, struck with the disgrace
inflicted on the dead person, was afraid to reflect dishonour on
his own memory, and his family. But if the deceased person
was not convicted of any crime, he was interred in an honourable
manner.
</p>

<p>
A still more astonishing circumstance, in this public inquest
upon the dead, was, that the throne itself was no protection
from it. Kings were spared during their lives, because the
public peace was concerned in this forbearance; but their
quality did not exempt them from the judgment passed upon
the dead, and even some of them were deprived of sepulture.
This custom was imitated by the Israelites. We see, in Scripture,
that bad kings were not interred in the monuments of
their ancestors. This practice suggested to princes, that if
their majesty placed them out of the reach of men's judgment
while they were alive, they would at last be liable to it when
death should reduce them to a level with their subjects.
</p>

<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>

<p>
When therefore a favourable judgment was pronounced on a
deceased person, the next thing was to proceed to the ceremonies
of interment. In his panegyric, no mention was made
of his birth, because every Egyptian was deemed noble. No
praises were considered as just or true, but such as related to
the personal merit of the deceased. He was applauded for
having received an excellent education in his younger years;
and in his more advanced age, for having cultivated piety
towards the gods, justice towards men, gentleness, modesty,
moderation, and all other virtues which constitute the good
man. Then all the people besought the gods to receive the
deceased into the assembly of the just, and to admit him as
a partaker with them of their everlasting felicity.
</p>

<p>
To conclude this article of the ceremonies of funerals, it may
not be amiss to observe to young pupils the different manners
in which the bodies of the dead were treated by the ancients.
Some, as we observed of the Egyptians, exposed them to view
after they had been embalmed, and thus preserved them to
after-ages. Others, as the Romans, burnt them on a funeral
pile; and others again, laid them in the earth.
</p>

<p>
The care to preserve bodies without lodging them in tombs,
appears injurious to human nature in general, and to those
persons in particular to whom respect is designed to be shown
by this custom; because it exposes too visibly their wretched
state and deformity; since, whatever care may be taken, spectators
see nothing but the melancholy and frightful remains of
what they once were. The custom of burning dead bodies has
something in it cruel and barbarous, in destroying so hastily
the remains of persons once dear to us. That of interment is
certainly the most ancient and religious. It restores to the
earth what had been taken from it; and prepares our belief of
a second restitution of our bodies, from that dust of which they
were at first formed.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. Of The Egyptian Soldiers And War.</head>

<p>
The profession of arms was in great repute among the Egyptians.
After the sacerdotal families, the most illustrious, as
with us, were those devoted to a military life. They were not
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
only distinguished by honours, but by ample liberalities. Every
soldier was allowed twelve Arouræ, that is, a piece of arable
land very near answering to half a French acre,<note place='foot'>Twelve
<hi rend='italic'>Arouræ</hi>. An <hi rend='italic'>Egyptian Aroura</hi> was 10,000
square cubits, equal to three roods, two perches, 55-1/4 square feet of our
measure.&mdash;Trans.</note> exempt from
all tax or tribute. Besides this privilege, each soldier received
a daily allowance of five pounds of bread, two of flesh, and a
quart of wine.<note place='foot'>The Greek is, οἴνου τέσσαρες ἀρυστῆρες, which some have
made to signify a determinate quantity of wine, or any other liquid: others, regarding
the etymology of the word ἀρυστὴρ, have translated it by
<foreign rend='italic'>haustrum</foreign>, a bucket, as Lucretius, lib. v. 51, others by
<foreign rend='italic'>haustus</foreign>, a draught or sup. Herodotus says, this
allowance was given only to the two thousand guards who attended annually on the kings.
Lib. ii. c. 168.&mdash;Trans.</note> This allowance was sufficient to support part
of their family. Such an indulgence made them more affectionate
to the person of their prince, and the interests of their
country, and more resolute in their defence of both; and as
Diodorus observes,<note place='foot'>Lib. i. p. 67.</note> it was thought inconsistent
with good policy, and even common sense, to commit the defence of a
country to men who had no interest in its preservation.
</p>

<p>
Four hundred thousand soldiers were kept in continual
pay;<note place='foot'>Herod. l. ii. c. 164, 168.</note> all natives of Egypt, and
trained up in the exactest discipline. They were inured to the fatigues of war, by a
severe and rigorous education. There is an art of forming the body
as well as the mind. This art, lost by our sloth, was well
known to the ancients, and especially to the Egyptians. Foot,
horse, and chariot races, were performed in Egypt with wonderful
agility, and the world could not show better horsemen
than the Egyptians. The Scripture in several places speaks
advantageously of their cavalry.<note place='foot'>Cant. i. 8. Isa. xxxvi. 9.</note>
</p>

<p>
Military laws were easily preserved in Egypt, because sons
received them from their fathers; the profession of war, as all
others, being transmitted from father to son. Those who fled
in battle, or discovered any signs of cowardice, were only
distinguished by some particular mark of ignominy; it being
thought more advisable to restrain them by motives of honour,
than by the terrors of punishment.<note place='foot'>Diod. p. 76.</note>
</p>

<p>
But notwithstanding this, I will not pretend to say, that the
Egyptians were a warlike people. It is of little advantage to
have regular and well-paid troops; to have armies exercised
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
in peace, and employed only in mock fights; it is war alone,
and real combats, which form the soldier. Egypt loved peace,
because it loved justice, and maintained soldiers only for its
security. Its inhabitants, content with a country which
abounded in all things, had no ambitious dreams of conquest.
The Egyptians extended their reputation in a very different
manner, by sending colonies into all parts of the world, and
with them laws and politeness. They triumphed by the wisdom
of their counsels, and the superiority of their knowledge; and
this empire of the mind appeared more noble and glorious to
them, than that which is achieved by arms and conquest.
But, nevertheless, Egypt has given birth to illustrious conquerors,
as will be observed hereafter, when we come to treat
of its kings.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. Of Their Arts And Sciences.</head>

<p>
The Egyptians had an inventive genius, but directed it only to
useful projects. Their Mercuries filled Egypt with wonderful
inventions, and left it scarcely ignorant of any thing which
could contribute to accomplish the mind, or procure ease and
happiness. The discoverers of any useful invention received,
both living and dead, rewards worthy of their profitable labours.
It is this which consecrated the books of their two Mercuries,
and stamped them with a divine authority. The first libraries
were in Egypt; and the titles they bore inspired an eager desire
to enter them, and dive into the secrets they contained. They
were called the <emph>remedy for the diseases of the
soul</emph>,<note place='foot'>Ψυχῆς ἰατρεῖον.&mdash;Trans.</note> and that
very justly, because the soul was there cured of ignorance, the
most dangerous, and the parent of all other maladies.
</p>

<p>
As their country was level, and the sky always serene and
unclouded, the Egyptians were among the first who observed
the courses of the planets. These observations led them to
regulate the year<note place='foot'>It will not seem surprising that the Egyptians, who
were the most ancient observers of the celestial motions, should have arrived to this
knowledge, when it is considered, that the lunar year, made use of by the Greeks and
Romans, though it appears so inconvenient and irregular, supposed nevertheless a
knowledge of the solar year, such as Diodorus Siculus ascribes to the Egyptians.
It will appear at first sight, by calculating their intercalations, that those who first
divided the year in this manner, were not ignorant, that, to three hundred sixty-five
days, some hours were to be added, to keep pace with the sun. Their only error lay in
the supposition, that only six hours were wanting; whereas an addition of almost
eleven minutes more was requisite.&mdash;Trans.</note> from the course of the sun; for
as Diodorus
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
observes, their year, from the most remote antiquity, was composed
of three hundred sixty-five days and six hours. To
adjust the property of their lands, which were every year
covered by the overflowing of the Nile, they were obliged to
have recourse to surveys; and this first taught them geometry.
They were great observers of nature, which, in a climate so
serene, and under so intense a sun, was vigorous and fruitful.
</p>

<p>
By this study and application they invented or improved the
science of physic. The sick were not abandoned to the arbitrary
will and caprice of the physician. He was obliged to
follow fixed rules, which were the observations of old and experienced
practitioners, and written in the sacred books. While
these rules were observed, the physician was not answerable for
the success; otherwise, a miscarriage cost him his life. This
law checked, indeed, the temerity of empirics; but then it
might prevent new discoveries, and keep the art from attaining
to its just perfection. Every physician, if Herodotus may
be credited,<note place='foot'>Lib. ii. c. 84.</note>
confined his practice to the cure of one disease
only; one was for the eyes, another for the teeth, and so on.
</p>

<p>
What we have said of the pyramids, the labyrinth, and that
infinite number of obelisks, temples, and palaces, whose precious
remains still strike the beholder with admiration, and in
which the magnificence of the princes who raised them, the
skill of the workmen, the riches of the ornaments diffused over
every part of them, and the just proportion and beautiful symmetry
of the parts, in which their greatest beauty consisted,
seemed to vie with each other; works, in many of which the
liveliness of the colours remains to this day, in spite of the
rude hand of time, which commonly deadens or destroys them:
all this, I say, shows the perfection to which architecture,
painting, sculpture, and all other arts, had arrived in Egypt.
</p>

<p>
The Egyptians entertained but a mean opinion of those
gymnastic exercises, which did not contribute to invigorate the
body, or improve health;<note place='foot'>Diod. l. i. p. 73.</note>
as well as of music, which they
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
considered as a diversion not only useless but dangerous, and
only fit to enervate the mind.<note place='foot'>Τὴν δὲ μουσικὴν νομίζουειν οὐ μόνον
ἄχρηστον ὑπάρχειν, ἀλλὰ καὶ βλαβερὰν,
ὡς ἄι ἐκθηλύνουσαν τὰς τῶν ἀνδρῶν ψυχάς.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. Of Their Husbandmen, Shepherds, and Artificers.</head>

<p>
Husbandmen, shepherds, and artificers, formed the three
classes of lower life in Egypt, but were nevertheless had in
very great esteem, particularly husbandmen and shepherds.<note place='foot'>Diod.
l. i. pp. 67, 68.</note> The body politic requires a superiority and subordination of
its several members; for as in the natural body, the eye may
be said to hold the first rank, yet its lustre does not dart contempt
upon the feet, the hands, or even on those parts which
are less honourable. In like manner, among the Egyptians,
the priests, soldiers, and scholars were distinguished by particular
honours; but all professions, to the meanest, had their
share in the public esteem, because the despising any man,
whose labours, however mean, were useful to the state, was
thought a crime.
</p>

<p>
A better reason than the foregoing might have inspired
them at the first with these sentiments of equity and moderation,
which they so long preserved. As they all descended
from Cham,<note place='foot'>Or Ham.&mdash;Trans.</note> their common father, the memory
of their still recent origin occurring to the minds of all in those first ages,
established among them a kind of equality, and stamped, in
their opinion, a nobility on every person derived from the common
stock. Indeed the difference of conditions, and the contempt
with which persons of the lowest rank are treated, are
owing merely to the distance from the common root; which
makes us forget that the meanest plebeian, when his descent is
traced back to the source, is equally noble with those of the
most elevated rank and titles.
</p>

<p>
Be that as it will, no profession in Egypt was considered as
grovelling or sordid. By this means arts were raised to their
highest perfection. The honour which cherished them mixed
with every thought and care for their improvement. Every
man had his way of life assigned him by the laws, and it was
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
perpetuated from father to son. Two professions at one time,
or a change of that which a man was born to, were never
allowed. By this means, men became more able and expert
in employments which they had always exercised from their
infancy; and every man, adding his own experience to that of
his ancestors, was more capable of attaining perfection in his
particular art. Besides, this wholesome institution, which had
been established anciently throughout Egypt, extinguished all
irregular ambition, and taught every man to sit down contented
with his condition, without aspiring to one more elevated,
from interest, vain-glory, or levity.
</p>

<p>
From this source flowed numberless inventions for the improvement
of all the arts, and for rendering life more commodious,
and trade more easy. I once could not believe that
Diodorus was in earnest, in what he relates concerning the
Egyptian industry,<note place='foot'>Diod. l. i. p. 67.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> that this people had found out a way,
by an artificial fecundity, to hatch eggs without the sitting of
the hen; but all modern travellers declare it to be a fact,
which certainly is worthy our investigation, and is said to be
practised also in Europe. Their relations inform us, that the
Egyptians stow eggs in ovens, which are heated to such a temperament,
and with such just proportion to the natural warmth
of the hen, that the chickens produced by these means are as
strong as those which are hatched the natural way. The season
of the year proper for this operation is, from the end of
December to the end of April; the heat in Egypt being too
violent in the other months. During these four months, upwards
of three hundred thousand eggs are laid in these ovens,
which, though they are not all successful, nevertheless produce
vast numbers of fowls at an easy rate. The art lies in giving
the ovens a due degree of heat, which must not exceed a fixed
proportion. About ten days are bestowed in heating these
ovens, and very near as much time in hatching the eggs. It is
very entertaining, say these travellers, to observe the hatching
of these chickens, some of which show at first nothing but
their heads, others but half their bodies, and others again come
quite out of the egg: these last, the moment they are hatched,
make their way over the unhatched eggs, and form a diverting
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
spectacle. Corneille le Bruyn, in his Travels,<note place='foot'>Tom. ii. p. 64.</note>
has collected the observations of other travellers on this subject. Pliny
likewise mentions it;<note place='foot'>Lib. x. c. 54.</note> but it appears from him,
that the Egyptians, anciently, employed warm dung, not ovens, to hatch
eggs.
</p>

<p>
I have said, that husbandmen particularly, and those who
took care of flocks, were in great esteem in Egypt, some parts
of it excepted, where the latter were not suffered.<note place='foot'>Swineherds, in
particular, had a general ill name throughout Egypt, as they had the care of so impure
an animal. Herodotus (l. ii. c. 47.) tells us, that they were not permitted to enter
the Egyptian Temples, nor would any man give them his daughter in
marriage.&mdash;Trans.</note> It was,
indeed, to these two professions that Egypt owed its riches and
plenty. It is astonishing to reflect what advantages the
Egyptians, by their art and labour, drew from a country of no
great extent, but whose soil was made wonderfully fruitful by
the inundations of the Nile, and the laborious industry of the
inhabitants.
</p>

<p>
It will be always so with every kingdom whose governors
direct all their actions to the public welfare. The culture of
lands, and the breeding of cattle, will be an inexhaustible fund
of wealth in all countries, where, as in Egypt, these profitable
callings are supported and encouraged by maxims of state and
policy: and we may consider it as a misfortune, that they are
at present fallen into so general a disesteem; though it is from
them that the most elevated ranks (as we esteem them) are
furnished, not only with the necessaries, but even the luxuries
of life. <q>For,</q> says Abbé Fleury, in his admirable work, <hi rend='italic'>Of
the manners of the Israelites</hi>, where the subject I am upon is
thoroughly examined, <q rend='pre'>it is the peasant who feeds the citizen,
the magistrate, the gentleman, the ecclesiastic: and whatever
artifice and craft may be used to convert money into commodities,
and these back again into money; yet all must
ultimately be owned to be received from the products of the
earth, and the animals which it sustains and nourishes.
Nevertheless, when we compare men's different stations of
life together, we give the lowest place to the husbandman:
and with many people a wealthy citizen, enervated with sloth,
useless to the public, and void of all merit, has the preference,
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
merely because he has more money, and lives a more
easy and delightful life.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But let us imagine to ourselves a country where so
great a difference is not made between the several conditions;
where the life of a nobleman is not made to consist
in idleness and doing nothing, but in a careful preservation
of his liberty; that is, in a due subjection to the laws
and the constitution; by a man's subsisting upon his estate
without a dependence on any one, and being contented to
enjoy a little with liberty, rather than a great deal at the
price of mean and base compliances: a country, where sloth,
effeminacy, and the ignorance of things necessary for life,
are held in just contempt; and where pleasure is less valued
than health and bodily strength: in such a country, it will be
much more for a man's reputation to plough, and keep flocks,
than to waste all his hours in sauntering from place to place,
in gaming and expensive diversions.</q>
</p>

<p>
But we need not have recourse to Plato's commonwealth,
for instances of men who have led these useful lives. It was
thus that the greatest part of mankind lived during near four
thousand years; and that not only the Israelites, but the
Egyptians, the Greeks, and the Romans, that is to say, nations
the most civilized, and most renowned for arms and wisdom.
They all inculcate the regard which ought to be paid to agriculture,
and the breeding of cattle: one of which (without
saying any thing of hemp and flax so necessary for our clothing)
supplies us by corn, fruits, and pulse, with not only a
plentiful but delicious nourishment; and the other, besides
its supply of exquisite meats to cover our tables, almost alone
gives life to manufactures and trade, by the skins and stuffs
it furnishes.
</p>

<p>
Princes are commonly desirous, and their interest certainly
requires it, that the peasant who, in a literal sense, sustains the
heat and burden of the day, and pays so great a proportion of
the national taxes, should meet with favour and encouragement.
But the kind and good intentions of princes are too
often defeated by the insatiable and merciless avarice of those
who are appointed to collect their revenues. History has transmitted
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
to us a fine saying of Tiberius on this head. A prefect
of Egypt having augmented the annual tribute of the province,
and, doubtless, with the view of making his court to the emperor,
remitted to him a much larger sum than was customary;
that prince, who, in the beginning of his reign, thought, or at
least spoke justly, answered, <q>that it was his design not to flay,
but to shear his sheep.</q><note place='foot'>Xiphilin. <hi rend='italic'>in
Apophthegm</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Tib. Cæs.</hi>
Κείρεσθαί μου τὰ πρόβατα, ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἀπαξύρεσθαι βούλομκι.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. Of The Fertility Of Egypt.</head>

<p>
Under this head, I shall treat only of some plants peculiar to
Egypt, and of the abundance of corn which it produced.
</p>

<p>
Papyrus. This is a plant, from the root of which shoot out
a great many triangular stalks, to the height of six or seven
cubits. The ancients writ at first upon palm leaves;<note place='foot'>Plin. l. xiii. c.
11.</note> next, on the inside of the bark of trees, from whence the word
<foreign rend='italic'>liber</foreign>,
or book, is derived; after that, upon tables covered over with
wax, on which the characters were impressed with an instrument
called Stylus, sharp-pointed at one end to write with, and
flat at the other, to efface what had been written; which gave
occasion to the following expression of Horace:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Sæpe stylum vertas, iterum quæ digna legi sint</l>
<l>Scripturus:</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> lib. i. x. ver. 72.
</p>

<lg>
<l>Oft turn your style, if you desire to write</l>
<l>Things that will bear a second reading&mdash;&mdash;</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The meaning of which is, that a good performance is not to
be expected without many erasures and corrections. At last
the use of paper<note place='foot'>The Papyrus was divided into thin flakes, (into which
it naturally parted,) which being laid on a table, and moistened with the glutinous
waters of the Nile, were afterwards pressed together, and dried in the
sun.&mdash;Trans.</note> was introduced, and this was made of the
bark of Papyrus, divided into thin flakes or leaves, which were
very proper for writing; and this Papyrus was likewise called
Byblus.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Nondum flumineas Memphis contexere byblos</l>
<l>Noverat.</l>
</lg>

<p>
Lucan.
</p>

<lg>
<l>Memphis as yet knew not to form in leaves</l>
<l>The wat'ry Byblos.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>

<p>
Pliny calls it a wonderful invention,<note place='foot'>Posteà promiscuè patuit usus
rei, quâ cons ... immortalitas hominum.&mdash;Chartæ ...
maxime humanitas constat in memoriâ.&mdash;Trans.</note> so useful to life, that
it preserves the memory of great actions, and immortalizes
those who achieved them. Varro ascribes this invention to
Alexander the Great, when he built Alexandria; but he had
only the merit of making paper more common, for the invention
was of much greater antiquity. The same Pliny adds,
that Eumenes, king of Pergamus, substituted parchment instead
of paper, in emulation of Ptolemy, king of Egypt, whose
library he was ambitious to excel by this invention, which had
the advantage over paper. Parchment is the skin of a sheep
dressed and made fit to write upon. It was called Pergamenum
from Pergamus, whose kings had the honour of the invention.
All the ancient manuscripts are either upon parchment, or
vellum, which is calf-skin, and a great deal finer than the common
parchment. It is very curious to see white fine paper
wrought out of filthy rags picked up in the streets. The
plant Papyrus was useful likewise for sails, tackling, clothes,
coverlets, &amp;c.<note place='foot'>Plin. l. xix. c. 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
Linum. Flax is a plant whose bark, full of fibres or strings,
is useful in making fine linen. The method of making this
linen in Egypt was wonderful, and carried to such perfection,
that the threads which were drawn out of them, were almost
too small for the observation of the sharpest eye. Priests were
always habited in linen, and never in woollen; and all persons
of distinction generally wore linen clothes. This flax formed
a considerable branch of the Egyptian trade, and great quantities
of it were exported into foreign countries. The manufacture
of flax employed a great number of hands in Egypt, especially
of the women, as appears from that passage of Isaiah,
in which the prophet menaces Egypt with a drought of so terrible
a nature, that it should interrupt every kind of labour.
<q>Moreover, they that work in fine flax, and they that weave
network, shall be confounded.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. xiv.
9.</note> We likewise find in Scripture,
that one effect of the plague of hail, called down by Moses
upon Egypt, was the destruction of all the flax which was then
bolled.<note place='foot'>Exod. ix. 31.</note> This storm was in March.
</p>

<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>

<p>
Byssus. This was another kind of flax extremely fine and
delicate, which often received a purple dye.<note place='foot'>Plin. lib. xix. c.
1.</note> It was very dear; and none but rich and wealthy persons could afford to wear it.
Pliny, who gives the first place to the Asbeston or Asbestinum,
(<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the incombustible flax,) places the Byssus in the next
rank; and says, <q>that the dress and ornaments of the ladies
were made of it.</q><note place='foot'>Proximus Byssino mulierum maximè deliciis genito:
inventum jam est etiam [scilicet Linum] quod ignibus non absumetur, vivum id vocant,
ardentesque in focis conviviorum ex eo vidimus mappas, sordibus exustis splendescentes
igni magis, quàm possent aquis: <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> A flax is now found out,
which is proof against the violence of fire; it is called living flax; and we have seen
table napkins of it glowing in the fires of our dining rooms; and receiving a lustre and
a cleanness from flames, which no water could have given it.&mdash;Trans.</note> It
appears from the Holy Scriptures, that
it was chiefly from Egypt that cloth made of this fine flax was
brought: <q>fine linen with broidered work from Egypt.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek.
xxvii. 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
I take no notice of the Lotus, a very common plant, and in
great request among the Egyptians, of whose berries, in former
times, they made bread. There was another Lotus in Africa,
which gave its name to the Lotophagi or Lotus-eaters; because
they lived upon the fruit of this tree, which had so delicious a
taste, if Homer may be credited, that it made those who ate
it forget all the sweets of their native country,<note place='foot'><p>Των
δ οστις λωτοιο φαγοι μελιηδεα καρπον,<lb/>
Ουκ ετ απαγγειλαι παλιν ηθελεν, ουδε νεεσθαι.<lb/>
Μη πω τις λωτοιο φαγων, νοστοιο λαθηται.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Odyss.</hi> ix. ver. 94, 95, 102.
</p>
<p>&mdash;Trans.</p></note> as Ulysses
found to his cost in his return from Troy.
</p>

<p>
In general, it may be said, that the Egyptian pulse and
fruits were excellent; and might, as Pliny observes,<note place='foot'>Ægyptus frugum
quidem fertilissima, sed ut propè sola iis carere possit, tanta
est ciborum ex herbis abundantia. Plin. l. xxi. c. 15.&mdash;Trans.</note> have sufficed
singly for the nourishment of the inhabitants, such was
their excellent quality, and so great their plenty. And, indeed,
working men lived then almost upon nothing else, as appears
from those who were employed in building the pyramids.
</p>

<p>
Besides these rural riches, the Nile, from its fish, and the
fatness it gave to the soil for the feeding of cattle, furnished the
tables of the Egyptians with the most exquisite fish of every
kind, and the most succulent flesh. This it was which made
the Israelites so deeply regret the loss of Egypt, when they
found themselves in the wilderness: <q>Who,</q> say they, in a
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
plaintive, and at the same time, seditious tone, <q>shall give us
flesh to eat? We remember the flesh which we did eat in
Egypt freely; the cucumbers and melons, and the leeks, and
the onions, and the garlick.<note place='foot'>Numb. xi. 4, 5.</note>
We sat by the flesh-pots, and
we did eat bread to the full.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xvi. 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
But the great and matchless wealth of Egypt arose from its
corn, which, even in an almost universal famine, enabled it to
support all the neighbouring nations, as it particularly did under
Joseph's administration. In later ages, it was the resource and
most certain granary of Rome and Constantinople. It is a
well-known story, how a calumny raised against St. Athanasius,
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> of his having threatened to prevent in future the importation
of corn into Constantinople from Alexandria, incensed the
emperor Constantine against that holy bishop, because he knew
that his capital city could not subsist without the corn which
was brought to it from Egypt. The same reason induced all
the emperors of Rome to take so great a care of Egypt, which
they considered as the nursing mother of the world's metropolis.
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless, the same river which enabled this province to
subsist the two most populous cities in the world, sometimes
reduced even Egypt itself to the most terrible famine: and it
is astonishing that Joseph's wise foresight, which in fruitful
years had made provision for seasons of sterility, should not
have taught these so much boasted politicians, to adopt similar
precautions against the changes and inconstancy of the Nile.
Pliny, in his panegyric upon Trajan, paints with wonderful
strength the extremity to which that country was reduced by
a famine under that prince's reign, and his generous relief of
it. The reader will not be displeased to read here an extract
of it, in which a greater regard will be had to Pliny's thoughts,
than to his expressions.
</p>

<p>
<q>The Egyptians,</q> says Pliny, <q>who gloried that they needed
neither rain nor sun to produce their corn, and who believed
they might confidently contest the prize of plenty with the most
fruitful countries of the world, were condemned to an unexpected
drought, and a fatal sterility; from the greatest part of
their territories being deserted and left unwatered by the Nile,
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
whose inundation is the source and sure standard of their
abundance. <q>They then implored that assistance from their
prince which they had been accustomed to expect only from
their river.</q><note place='foot'>Inundatione, id est, ubertate regio fraudata, sic
opem Cæsaris invocavit, ut solet amnem suum.&mdash;Trans.</note> The delay of their
relief was no longer than that which employed a courier to bring the melancholy news to
Rome; and one would have imagined, that this misfortune had
befallen them only to display with greater lustre the generosity
and goodness of Cæsar. It was an ancient and general opinion,
that our city could not subsist without provisions drawn from
Egypt.<note place='foot'>Percrebuerat antiquitùs urbem nostram nisi opibus Ægypti ali
sustentarique non posse. Superbiebat ventosa et insolens natio, quòd victorem quidem
populum pasceret tamen, quòdque in suo flumine, in suis manibus, vel abundantia nostra
vel fames esset. Refudimus Nilo suas copias. Recepit frumenta quæ miserat, deportatasque
messes revexit.&mdash;Trans.</note> This vain and proud nation boasted, that though
conquered, they nevertheless fed their conquerors; that, by means
of their river, either abundance or scarcity were entirely in
their own disposal. But we now have returned the Nile his
own harvests, and given him back the provisions he sent us.
Let the Egyptians be then convinced, by their own experience,
that they are not necessary to us, and are only our vassals.
Let them know that their ships do not so much bring us the
provision we stand in need of, as the tribute which they owe
us. And let them never forget that we can do without them,
but that they can never do without us. This most fruitful province
had been ruined, had it not worn the Roman chains.
The Egyptians, in their sovereign, found a deliverer, and a
father. Astonished at the sight of their granaries, filled without
any labour of their own, they were at a loss to know to
whom they owed this foreign and gratuitous plenty. The
famine of a people, though at such a distance from us, yet so
speedily stopped, served only to let them feel the advantage of
living under our empire. The Nile may, in other times, have
diffused more plenty on Egypt, but never more glory upon us.<note place='foot'>Nilus
Ægypto quidem sæpe. sed gloriæ nostræ nuaquam largior
fluxit.&mdash;Trans.</note>
May Heaven, content with this proof of the people's patience,
and the prince's generosity, restore for ever back to Egypt its
ancient fertility!</q>
</p>

<p>
Pliny's reproach to the Egyptians, for their vain and foolish
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
pride with regard to the inundations of the Nile, points out
one of their most peculiar characteristics, and recalls to my
mind a fine passage of Ezekiel, where God thus speaks to
Pharaoh, one of their kings, <q>Behold I am against thee,
Pharaoh, king of Egypt, the great Dragon that lieth in the
midst of his rivers, which hath said, My river is my own, and
I have made it for myself.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. xxix. 3,
9.</note> God perceived an insupportable
pride in the heart of this prince: a sense of security and confidence
in the inundations of the Nile, independent entirely on
the influences of heaven; as though the happy effects of this
inundation had been owing to nothing but his own care and
labour, or those of his predecessors: <q>the river is mine, and I
have made it.</q>
</p>

<p>
Before I conclude this second part, which treats of the
manners of the Egyptians, I think it incumbent on me to bespeak
the attention of my readers to different passages scattered
in the history of Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, and Moses,
which confirm and illustrate part of what we meet with in profane
authors upon this subject. They will there observe the
perfect polity which reigned in Egypt, both in the court and
the rest of the kingdom; the vigilance of the prince, who was
informed of all transactions, had a regular council, a chosen
number of ministers, armies ever well maintained and disciplined,
both of horse, foot, and armed chariots; intendants in
all the provinces; overseers or guardians of the public granaries;
wise and exact dispensers of the corn lodged in them;
a court composed of great officers of the crown, a captain of
his guards, a chief cup-bearer, a master of his pantry; in a
word, all things that compose a prince's household, and constitute
a magnificent court. But above all these, the readers
will admire the fear in which the threatenings of God were
held, the inspector of all actions, and the judge of kings themselves;
and the horror the Egyptians had for adultery, which
was acknowledged to be a crime of so heinous a nature, that
it alone was capable of bringing destruction on a nation.<note place='foot'>Gen.
xii. 10-26.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Part The Third. The Kings of Egypt.'/>
<head>Part The Third. The History of the Kings of Egypt.</head>

<p>
No part of ancient history is more obscure or uncertain, than
that of the first kings of Egypt. This proud nation, fondly
conceited of its antiquity and nobility, thought it glorious to
lose itself in an abyss of infinite ages, which seemed to carry
its pretensions backward to eternity. According to its own
historians,<note place='foot'>Diod. l. i. p. 41.</note> first,
gods, and afterwards demigods or heroes,
governed it successively, through a series of more than twenty
thousand years. But the absurdity of this vain and fabulous
claim is easily discovered.
</p>

<p>
To gods and demigods, men succeeded as rulers or kings in
Egypt, of whom Manetho has left us thirty dynasties or principalities.
This Manetho was an Egyptian high priest, and
keeper of the sacred archives of Egypt, and had been instructed
in the Grecian learning: he wrote a history of Egypt, which
he pretended to have extracted from the writings of Mercurius,
and other ancient memoirs, preserved in the archives of the
Egyptian temples. He drew up this history under the reign,
and at the command of Ptolemy Philadelphus. If his thirty
dynasties are allowed to be successive, they make up a series
of time, of more than five thousand three hundred years, to
the reign of Alexander the Great; but this is a manifest forgery.
Besides, we find in Eratosthenes,<note place='foot'>An historian
of Cyrene.&mdash;Trans.</note> who was invited to
Alexandria by Ptolemy Euergetes, a catalogue of thirty-eight
kings of Thebes, all different from those of Manetho. The
clearing up of these difficulties has put the learned to a great
deal of trouble and labour. The most effectual way to reconcile
such contradictions, is to suppose, with almost all the
modern writers upon this subject, that the kings of these different
dynasties did not reign successively after one another,
but many of them at the same time, and in different countries
of Egypt. There were in Egypt four principal dynasties, that
of Thebes, of Thin, of Memphis, and of Tanis. I shall not
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
here give my readers a list of the kings who have reigned in
Egypt, of most of whom we have only the names transmitted
to us. I shall only take notice of what seems to me most
proper, to give youth the necessary light into this part of history,
for whose sake principally I engaged in this undertaking;
and I shall confine myself chiefly to the memoirs left us by
Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus, concerning the Egyptian
kings, without even scrupulously preserving the exactness of
succession, at least in the early part of the monarchy, which is
very obscure; and without pretending to reconcile these two
historians. Their design, especially that of Herodotus, was
not to lay before us an exact series of the kings of Egypt, but
only to point out those princes whose history appeared to them
most important and instructive. I shall follow the same plan,
and hope to be forgiven, for not having involved either myself
or my readers in a labyrinth of almost inextricable difficulties,
from which the most able can scarce disengage themselves,
when they pretend to follow the series of history, and reduce
it to fixed and certain dates. The curious may consult
the learned pieces,<note place='foot'>Sir John Marsham's <hi rend='italic'>Canon
Chronic</hi>. Father Pezron; the Dissertations of F. Tournemine, and Abbé Sevin,
&amp;c.&mdash;Trans.</note> in which this subject is treated in all
its extent.
</p>

<p>
I am to premise, that Herodotus, upon the credit of the
Egyptian priests, whom he had consulted, gives us a great
number of oracles and singular incidents, all which, though he
relates them as so many facts, the judicious reader will easily
discover to be what they really are&mdash;I mean, fictions.
</p>

<p>
The ancient history of Egypt comprehends 2158 years, and
is naturally divided into three periods.
</p>

<p>
The first begins with the establishment of the Egyptian
monarchy, by Menes or Misraim, the son of Cham,<note place='foot'>Or Ham.</note> in the
year of the world 1816; and ends with the destruction of that
monarchy by Cambyses, king of Persia, in the year of the
world 3479. This first period contains 1663 years.
</p>

<p>
The second period is intermixed with the Persian and Grecian
history, and extends to the death of Alexander the Great,
which happened in the year 3681, and consequently includes
202 years.
</p>

<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>

<p>
The third period is that in which a new monarchy was
formed in Egypt by the Lagidæ, or Ptolemies, descendants
from Lagus, to the death of Cleopatra, the last queen of Egypt,
in 3974; and this last comprehends 293 years.
</p>

<p>
I shall now treat only of the first period, reserving the two
others for the Æras to which they belong.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 1816. Ant. J.C. 2188.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Kings of Egypt.&mdash;Menes.</hi> Historians are unanimously
agreed, that Menes was the first king of Egypt.
It is pretended, and not without foundation, that he
is the same with Misraïm, the son of Cham.
</p>

<p>
Cham was the second son of Noah. When the family of
the latter, after the extravagant attempt of building the tower
of Babel, dispersed themselves into different countries, Cham
retired to Africa; and it doubtless was he who afterwards was
worshipped as a god, under the name of Jupiter Ammon. He
had four children, Chus,<note place='foot'>Or Cush, Gen. x.
6.</note> Misraïm, Phut, and Canaan. Chus
settled in Ethiopia, Misraïm in Egypt, which generally is called
in Scripture after his name, and by that of Cham,<note place='foot'>The footsteps of its
old name (Mesraim) remain to this day among the Arabians,
who call it Mesre; by the testimony of Plutarch, it was called χημία, Chemia, by
an easy corruption of Chamia, and this for Cham or Ham.&mdash;Trans.</note> his father;
Phut took possession of that part of Africa which lies westward
of Egypt; and Canaan, of the country which afterwards bore
his name. The Canaanites are certainly the same people who
are called almost always Phœnicians by the Greeks, of which
foreign name no reason can be given, any more than of the
oblivion of the true one.
</p>

<p>
I return to Misraïm.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. ii. p. 99. Diod.
l. i. p. 42.</note> He is allowed to be the same with
Menes, whom all historians declare to be the first king of Egypt,
the institutor of the worship of the gods, and of the ceremonies
of the sacrifices.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Busiris</hi>, some ages after him, built the famous city of
Thebes, and made it the seat of his empire. We have elsewhere
taken notice of the wealth and magnificence of this city.
This prince is not to be confounded with Busiris, so infamous
for his cruelties.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Osymandyas.</hi> Diodorus gives a very particular description
of many magnificent edifices raised by this king;<note place='foot'>Diod.
l. i. pp. 44, 45.</note> one of
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
which was adorned with sculptures and paintings of exquisite
beauty, representing his expedition against the Bactrians, a
people of Asia, whom he had invaded with four hundred thousand
foot and twenty thousand horse. In another part of the
edifice was exhibited an assembly of the judges, whose president
wore, on his breast, a picture of Truth, with her eyes shut,
and himself was surrounded with books&mdash;an emphatic emblem,
denoting that judges ought to be perfectly versed in the laws,
and impartial in the administration of them.
</p>

<p>
The king likewise was painted here, offering to the gods
gold and silver, which he drew every year from the mines of
Egypt, amounting to the sum of sixteen millions.<note place='foot'>Three
thousand two hundred myriads of Minæ.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
Not far from hence was seen a magnificent library, the oldest
mentioned in history. Its title or inscription on the front was,
<hi rend='italic'>The office, or treasury, of remedies for the diseases of the soul</hi>.
Near it were placed statues, representing all the Egyptian gods,
to each of whom the king made suitable offerings; by which
he seemed to be desirous of informing posterity that his life
and reign had been crowned with piety to the gods, and justice
to men.
</p>

<p>
His mausoleum displayed uncommon magnificence; it was
encompassed with a circle of gold, a cubit in breadth, and 365
cubits in circumference; each of which showed the rising and
setting of the sun, moon, and the rest of the planets. For
so early as this king's reign, the Egyptians divided the year
into twelve months, each consisting of thirty days; to which
they added every year five days and six hours.<note place='foot'>See Sir
Isaac Newton's <hi rend='italic'>Chronology</hi>, p. 30.</note> The spectator
did not know which to admire most in this stately monument,
whether the richness of its materials, or the genius and industry
of the artists.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Uchoreus</hi>, one of the successors of Osymandyas, built
the city of Memphis.<note place='foot'>Diod. p. 46.</note> This city was 150 furlongs,
or more than seven leagues in circumference, and stood at the point of
the Delta, in that part where the Nile divides itself into several
branches or streams. Southward from the city, he raised a
lofty mole. On the right and left he dug very deep moats to
receive the river. These were faced with stone, and raised,
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
near the city, by strong causeys; the whole designed to secure
the city from the inundations of the Nile, and the incursions
of the enemy. A city so advantageously situated, and so
strongly fortified, that it was almost the key of the Nile, and
by this means commanded the whole country, became soon the
usual residence of the Egyptian kings. It kept possession of
this honour till Alexandria was built by Alexander the Great.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Mœris</hi>. This king made the famous lake, which went by
his name, and whereof mention has been already made,
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 1920. Ant. J.C. 2084.</note>
Egypt had long been governed by its native princes,
when strangers, called Shepherd-kings, (Hycsos
in the Egyptian language,) from Arabia or Phœnicia,
invaded and seized a great part of Lower Egypt,
and Memphis itself; but Upper Egypt remained unconquered,
and the kingdom of Thebes existed till the reign of Sesostris.
These foreign princes governed about 260 years.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2084. Ant. J.C. 1920.</note>
Under one of these princes, called Pharaoh in Scripture,<note place='foot'>Gen.
xii. 10-20.</note> (a name common to all the kings of Egypt,) Abraham
arrived there with his wife Sarah, who was exposed
to great hazard, on account of her exquisite beauty,
which reaching the prince's ear, she was by him taken from
Abraham, upon the supposition that she was not his wife, but
only his sister.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2179. Ant. J.C. 1825.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Thethmosis</hi>, or Amosis, having expelled the Shepherd-kings,
reigned in Lower Egypt.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2276. Ant. J.C. 1728.</note>
Long after his reign, Joseph was brought a slave
into Egypt, by some Ishmaelitish merchants; sold
to Potiphar; and, by a series of wonderful events,
enjoyed the supreme authority, by his being raised to
the chief employment of the kingdom. I shall pass over
his history, as it is so universally known. But I must take
notice of a remark of Justin, (the epitomizer of Trogus Pompeius,<note place='foot'>Lib.
xxxvi. c. 2.</note>
an excellent historian of the Augustan age,) <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> that
Joseph, the youngest of Jacob's children, whom his brethren,
through envy, had sold to foreign merchants, being endowed
from heaven<note place='foot'>Justin ascribes this gift of heaven to
Joseph's skill in magical arts: Cùm magicas ibi artes (Egypto) solerti
ingenio percepisset, &amp;c.&mdash;Trans.</note>
with the interpretation of dreams, and a knowledge
of futurity, preserved, by his uncommon prudence,
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
Egypt from the famine with which it was menaced, and was
extremely caressed by the king.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2298. Ant. J.C. 1706.</note>
Jacob also went into Egypt with his whole family, which
met with the kindest treatment from the Egyptians,
whilst Joseph's important services were fresh in
their memories. But after his death, say the Scriptures,<note place='foot'>Exod.
i. 8.</note> <q>there arose up a new king, which knew not Joseph.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2427. Ant. J.C. 1577.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rameses-miamun</hi>, according to archbishop Usher, was the
name of this king, who is called Pharaoh in Scripture.
He reigned sixty-six years, and oppressed the Israelites
in a most grievous manner. <q>He set over them
task-masters, to afflict them with their burdens, and they built
for Pharaoh treasure-cities,<note place='foot'>Heb. urbes thesaurorum. LXX.
urbes munitas. These cities were appointed to preserve, as in a storehouse,
the corn, oil, and other products of Egypt. Vatab.&mdash;Trans.</note>
Pithom and Raamses&mdash;and the
Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigour,
and they made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in mortar
and in brick, and in all manner of service in the field; all their
service wherein they made them serve, was with rigour.</q><note place='foot'>Exod.
i. 11, 13, 14.</note> This king had two sons, Amenophis and Busiris.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2494. Ant. J.C. 1510.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Amenophis</hi>, the eldest, succeeded him. He was the Pharaoh,
under whose reign the Israelites departed out
of Egypt, and was drowned in passing the Red-Sea.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2513. Ant. J.C. 1491.</note>
Father Tournemine makes Sesostris, of whom we shall
speak immediately, the Pharaoh who raised the persecution
against the Israelites, and oppressed them
with the most painful toils. This is exactly agreeable
to the account given by Diodorus of this prince, who employed
in his Egyptian works only foreigners; so that we may place
the memorable event of the passage of the Red-Sea, under
his son Pheron;<note place='foot'>This name bears a great resemblance to Pharaoh, which
was common to the Egyptian kings.&mdash;Trans.</note> and the characteristic of impiety
ascribed to him by Herodotus, greatly strengthens the probability of this
conjecture. The plan I have proposed to follow in this history,
excuses me from entering into chronological discussions.
</p>

<p>
Diodorus, speaking of the Red-Sea,<note place='foot'>Lib. iii. p. 74.</note> has made one
remark very worthy our observation; a tradition (says that historian)
has been transmitted through the whole nation, from father to
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
son, for many ages, that once an extraordinary ebb dried up
the sea, so that its bottom was seen; and that a violent flow
immediately after brought back the waters to their former
channel. It is evident, that the miraculous passage of Moses
over the Red-Sea is here hinted at; and I make this remark,
purposely to admonish young students, not to slip over, in
their perusal of authors, these precious remains of antiquity;
especially when they bear, like this passage, any relation to
religion.
</p>

<p>
Archbishop Usher says, that Amenophis left two sons, one
called Sesothis or Sesostris, and the other Armais. The Greeks
call him Belus, and his two sons Egyptus and Danaus.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sesostris</hi><note place='foot'>Herod. l.
ii. c. 102, 110. Diod. l. i. pp. 48, 54.</note>
was not only one of the most powerful kings of
Egypt, but one of the greatest conquerors that antiquity boasts
of. His father, whether by inspiration, caprice, or, as the
Egyptians say, by the authority of an oracle, formed a design
of making his son a conqueror. This he set about after the
Egyptian manner, that is, in a great and noble way. All the
male children, born the same day with Sesostris, were, by
the king's order, brought to court. Here they were educated
as if they had been his own children, with the same care bestowed
on Sesostris, with whom they were brought up. He
could not possibly have given him more faithful ministers, nor
officers who more zealously desired the success of his arms.
The chief part of their education was, the enuring them, from
their infancy, to a hard and laborious life, in order that they
might one day be capable of sustaining with ease the toils of
war. They were never suffered to eat, till they had run, on
foot or horseback, a considerable race. Hunting was their
most common exercise.
</p>

<p>
Ælian remarks<note place='foot'>Τὰ νοήματα ἐκμενσώθηναι, lib. xii. c.
4.</note> that Sesostris was taught by Mercury, who
instructed him in politics, and the art of government. This
Mercury is he whom the Greeks called Trismegistus, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
thrice great. Egypt, his native country, owes to him the invention
of almost every art. The two books, which go under
his name, bear such evident characters of novelty, that the
forgery is no longer doubted. There was another Mercury
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
who also was very famous amongst the Egyptians for his rare
knowledge; and of much greater antiquity than he of whom
we have been speaking. Jamblicus, a priest of Egypt, affirms,
that it was customary with the Egyptians, to affix the name of
Hermes or Mercury to all the new books or inventions that
were offered to the public.
</p>

<p>
When Sesostris was more advanced in years, his father sent
him against the Arabians, in order to acquire military knowledge.
Here the young prince learned to bear hunger and
thirst; and subdued a nation which till then had never been
conquered. The youths educated with him attended him in all
his campaigns.
</p>

<p>
Accustomed by this conquest to martial toils, he was next
sent by his father to try his fortune westward. He invaded
Libya, and subdued the greatest part of that vast country.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2513. Ant. J.C. 1491.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sesostris</hi>. During this expedition his father died, and left
him capable of attempting the greatest enterprises.
He formed no less a design than that of the conquest
of the world. But before he left his kingdom,
he provided for his domestic security, in winning the
hearts of his subjects by his generosity, justice, and a popular
and obliging behaviour. He was no less studious to gain the
affection of his officers and soldiers, whom he wished to be
ever ready to shed the last drop of their blood in his service;
persuaded that his enterprises would all be unsuccessful, unless
his army should be attached to his person, by all the ties
of esteem, affection, and interest. He divided the country
into thirty-six governments (called Nomi,) and bestowed them
on persons of merit, and the most approved fidelity.
</p>

<p>
In the mean time he made the requisite preparations, levied
forces, and headed them with officers of the greatest bravery
and reputation, and these were taken chiefly from among the
youths who had been educated with him. He had seventeen
hundred of these officers, who were all capable of inspiring his
troops with resolution, a love of discipline, and a zeal for the
service of their prince. His army consisted of six hundred
thousand foot, and twenty-four thousand horse, besides twenty-seven
thousand armed chariots.
</p>

<p>
He began his expedition by invading Æthiopia, situated to
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
the south of Egypt. He made it tributary, and obliged the
nations of it to furnish him annually with a certain quantity of
ebony, ivory, and gold.
</p>

<p>
He had fitted out a fleet of four hundred sail, and ordering
it to advance to the Red-Sea, made himself master of the isles
and cities lying on the coasts of that sea. He himself heading
his land army, overran and subdued Asia with amazing rapidity,
and advanced farther into India than Hercules, Bacchus,
and in after-times Alexander himself, had ever done; for he
subdued the countries beyond the Ganges, and advanced as
far as the Ocean. One may judge from hence how unable the
more neighbouring countries were to resist him. The Scythians,
as far as the river Tanais, as well as Armenia, and
Cappadocia, were conquered. He left a colony in the ancient
kingdom of Colchos, situated to the east of the Black Sea,
where the Egyptian customs and manners have been ever
since retained. Herodotus saw in Asia Minor, from one sea
to the other, monuments of his victories. In several countries
was read the following inscription engraven on pillars: <q>Sesostris,
king of kings, and lord of lords, subdued this country by
the power of his arms.</q> Such pillars were found even in
Thrace, and his empire extended from the Ganges to the
Danube. In his expeditions, some nations bravely defended
their liberties, and others yielded them up without making the
least resistance. This disparity was denoted by him in hieroglyphical
figures, on the monuments erected to perpetuate
the remembrance of his victories, agreeably to the Egyptian
practice.
</p>

<p>
The scarcity of provisions in Thrace stopped the progress
of his conquests, and prevented his advancing farther in
Europe. One remarkable circumstance is observed in this
conqueror, who never once thought, as others had done, of
preserving his acquisitions; but contenting himself with the
glory of having subdued and despoiled so many nations; after
having made wild havoc up and down the world for nine
years, he confined himself almost within the ancient limits of
Egypt, a few neighbouring provinces excepted; for we do not
find any traces or footsteps of this new empire, either under
himself or his successors.
</p>

<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>

<p>
He returned therefore laden with the spoils of the vanquished
nations, dragging after him a numberless multitude
of captives, and covered with greater glory than any of his
predecessors; that glory, I mean, which employs so many
tongues and pens in its praise; which consists in invading a
great number of provinces in a hostile way, and is often productive
of numberless calamities. He rewarded his officers
and soldiers with a truly royal magnificence, in proportion to
their rank and merit. He made it both his pleasure and duty,
to put the companions of his victory in such a condition as
might enable them to enjoy, during the remainder of their
days, a calm and easy repose, the just reward of their past
toils.
</p>

<p>
With regard to himself, for ever careful of his own reputation,
and still more of making his power advantageous to his
subjects, he employed the repose which peace allowed him, in
raising works that might contribute more to the enriching of
Egypt, than the immortalizing his name; works, in which the
art and industry of the workman were more admired, than the
immense sums which had been expended on them.
</p>

<p>
A hundred famous temples, raised as so many monuments
of gratitude to the tutelar gods of all the cities, were the first,
as well as the most illustrious, testimonies of his victories; and
he took care to publish in the inscriptions on them, that these
mighty works had been completed without burdening any of his
subjects. He made it his glory to be tender of them, and to
employ only captives in these monuments of his conquests.
The Scriptures take notice of something like this, where they
speak of the buildings of Solomon.<note place='foot'>2 Chron. viii.
9. But of the children of Israel did Solomon make no servants for
his work.&mdash;Trans.</note> But he prided himself
particularly in adorning and enriching the temple of Vulcan at
Pelusium, in acknowledgment of the protection which he fancied
that god had bestowed on him, when, on his return from
his expeditions, his brother had a design of destroying him in
that city, with his wife and children, by setting fire to the
apartment where he then lay.
</p>

<p>
His great work was, the raising, in every part of Egypt, a
considerable number of high banks or moles, on which new
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
cities were built, in order that these might be a security for
men and beasts during the inundations of the Nile.
</p>

<p>
From Memphis, as far as the sea, he cut, on both sides of
the river, a great number of canals, for the conveniency of
trade, and the conveying of provisions, and for the settling an
easy correspondence between such cities as were most distant
from one another. Besides the advantages of traffic, Egypt was,
by these canals, made inaccessible to the cavalry of its enemies,
which before had so often harassed it by repeated incursions.
</p>

<p>
He did still more. To secure Egypt from the inroads of
its nearer neighbours, the Syrians and Arabians, he fortified
all the eastern coast from Pelusium to Heliopolis, that is, for
upwards of seven leagues.<note place='foot'>150 stadia, about 18 miles
English.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
Sesostris might have been considered as one of the most
illustrious and most boasted heroes of antiquity, had not the
lustre of his warlike actions, as well as his pacific virtues, been
tarnished by a thirst of glory, and a blind fondness for his own
grandeur, which made him forget that he was a man. The
kings and chiefs of the conquered nations came, at stated
times, to do homage to their victor, and pay him the appointed
tribute. On every other occasion, he treated them with sufficient
humanity and generosity. But when he went to the
temple, or entered his capital, he caused these princes to be
harnessed to his car, four abreast, instead of horses; and
valued himself upon his being thus drawn by the lords and
sovereigns of other nations. What I am most surprised at, is,
that Diodorus should rank this foolish and inhuman vanity
among the most shining actions of this prince.
</p>

<p>
Being grown blind in his old age, he died by his own hands,
after having reigned thirty-three years, and left his kingdom
infinitely rich. His empire, nevertheless, did not reach beyond
the fourth generation. But there still remained, so low as the
reign of Tiberius, magnificent monuments, which showed the
extent of Egypt under Sesostris,<note place='foot'>Tacit.
<hi rend='italic'>Ann.</hi> l. ii. c. 60.</note> and the immense tributes
which were paid to it.<note place='foot'>Legebantur indicta gentibus
tributa&mdash;haud minùs magnifica quàm nunc vi Parthorum aut
potentiâ Romanâ jubentur&mdash;Inscribed on pillars, were read the tributes
imposed on vanquished nations, which were not inferior to those now paid to
the Parthian and Roman powers.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>

<p>
I now go back to some facts which took place in this period,
but which were omitted, in order that I might not break
the thread of the history, and now I shall but barely mention
them.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2448.</note> About the æra in question, the Egyptians settled
themselves in divers parts of the earth. The colony, which Cecrops
led out of Egypt, built twelve cities, or rather
as many towns, of which he composed the kingdom of Athens.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2530.</note> We observed, that the brother of Sesostris, called
by the Greeks Danaus, had formed a design to murder him, on his
return to Egypt, after his conquest. But being defeated
in his horrid project, he was obliged to fly.
He thereupon retired to Peloponnesus, where he seized upon
the kingdom of Argos, which had been founded about four
hundred years before, by Inachus.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2533.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Busiris</hi>, brother of
Amenophis, so infamous among the ancients for his cruelties, exercised his tyranny at
that time on the banks of the Nile; and barbarously
murdered all foreigners who landed in his country: this was
probably during the absence of Sesostris.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2549.</note> About the same time, Cadmus brought from Syria
into Greece the invention of letters. Some pretend, that these
characters or letters were Egyptian, and that Cadmus
himself was a native of Egypt, and not of Phœnicia; and
the Egyptians, who ascribe to themselves the invention of every
art, and boast a greater antiquity than any other nation, give
to their Mercury the honour of inventing letters. Most of the
learned agree,<note place='foot'>The reader may consult, on this subject, two learned
dissertations of Abbé Renaudot, inserted in the second volume of
<hi rend='italic'>The History of the Academy of Inscriptions</hi>.&mdash;Trans.</note>
that Cadmus carried the Phœnician or Syrian
letters into Greece, and that those letters were the same as the
Hebraic; the Hebrews, who formed but a small nation, being
comprehended under the general name of Syrians. Joseph
Scaliger, in his notes on the <hi rend='italic'>Chronicon</hi> of Eusebius, proves,
that the Greek letters, and those of the Latin alphabet formed
from them, derive their original from the ancient Phœnician
letters, which are the same with the Samaritan, and were used
by the Jews before the Babylonish captivity. Cadmus carried
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
only sixteen letters<note place='foot'>The sixteen letters brought by Cadmus into Greece,
are α, β, γ, δ, ε, ι, κ, λ, μ, ν, ο, π, ρ, σ, τ, υ.
Palamedes, at the siege of Troy, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> upwards of two hundred and
fifty years lower than Cadmus, added the four following, ξ, θ, φ, χ; and Simonides,
a long time after, invented the four others, namely, η, ω, ζ, ψ.&mdash;Trans.</note>
into Greece, eight others being added afterwards.
</p>

<p>
I return to the history of the Egyptian kings, whom I shall
hereafter rank in the same order as Herodotus has assigned
to them.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2517. Ant. J.C. 1547.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Pheron</hi> succeeded Sesostris in his kingdom, but not in his
glory. Herodotus<note place='foot'>Herod. l. ii. c. 111. Diod. l. i.
p. 54.</note> relates but one action of his, which
shows how greatly he had degenerated from the religious
sentiments of his father. In an extraordinary
inundation of the Nile, which exceeded eighteen cubits, this
prince, enraged at the wild havoc which was made by it, threw
a javelin at the river, as if he intended thereby to chastise its
insolence; but was himself immediately punished for his impiety,
if the historian may be credited, with the loss of sight.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2800. Ant. J.C. 1204.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Proteus</hi>.<note place='foot'>I do not think myself obliged to
enter here into a discussion, which would be attended with very perplexing difficulties,
should I pretend to reconcile the series, or succession of the kings, as given by
Herodotus, with the opinion of archbishop Usher. This last supposes, with many other
learned men, that Sesostris is the son of that Egyptian king who was drowned in the
Red-Sea, whose reign must consequently have begun in the year of the world 2513, and
continued till the year 2547, since it lasted thirty-three years. Should we allow fifty
years to the reign of Pheron his son, there would still be an interval of above two
hundred years between Pheron and Proteus, who, according to Herodotus, was the immediate
successor of the former; since Proteus lived at the time of the siege of Troy, which,
according to Usher, was taken An. Mun. 2820. I know not whether his almost total silence
on the Egyptian kings after Sesostris, was owing to his sense of this difficulty. I
suppose a long interval to have occurred between Pheron and Proteus; accordingly,
Diodorus (lib. i. p. liv.) fills it up with a great many kings; and the same must be
said of some of the following kings.&mdash;Trans.</note>
He was of Memphis, where, in Herodotus's
time,<note place='foot'>Herod. l. ii. c. 112, 120.</note> his temple was still standing,
in which was a chapel dedicated to Venus the Stranger. It is conjectured
that this Venus was Helen. For, in the reign
of this monarch, Paris the Trojan, returning home with Helen
whom he had stolen, was driven by a storm into one of the
mouths of the Nile, called Canopic; and from thence was
conducted to Proteus at Memphis, who reproached him in the
strongest terms for his base perfidy and guilt, in stealing the
wife of his host, and with her all the effects in his house. He
added, that the only reason why he did not punish him with
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
death (as his crime deserved) was, because the Egyptians
were careful not to imbrue their hands in the blood of strangers:
that he would keep Helen, with all the riches that were brought
with her, in order to restore them to their lawful owner: that
as for himself, (Paris,) he must either quit his dominions in
three days, or expect to be treated as an enemy. The king's
order was obeyed. Paris continued his voyage, and arrived
at Troy, whither he was closely pursued by the Grecian army.
The Greeks summoned the Trojans to surrender Helen, and
with her all the treasures of which her husband had been
plundered. The Trojans answered, that neither Helen, nor
her treasures, were in their city. And, indeed, was it at all
likely, says Herodotus, that Priam, who was so wise an old
prince, should choose to see his children and country destroyed
before his eyes, rather than give the Greeks the just and reasonable
satisfaction they desired? But it was to no purpose
for them to affirm with an oath, that Helen was not in their
city; the Greeks, being firmly persuaded that they were trifled
with, persisted obstinately in their unbelief: the deity, continues
the same historian, being resolved that the Trojans, by
the total destruction of their city and empire, should teach the
affrighted world this lesson:<note place='foot'>Ὡς τῶν μεγαλων ἀδικημάτον μεγάλαι εἰσὶ
καὶ αἱ τιμωρὶαι παρὰ τῶν Θεῶν.&mdash;Trans.</note>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>That
great crimes are attended with as great and signal punishments from the
offended gods.</hi> Menelaus, on his return from Troy, called
at the court of king Proteus, who restored him Helen, with all
her treasure. Herodotus proves, from some passages in Homer,
that the voyage of Paris to Egypt was not unknown to
this poet.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rhampsinitus.</hi> What is related by Herodotus<note place='foot'>L.
ii. c. 121, 123.</note> concerning the treasury built by this king, who was the richest
of all his predecessors, and his descent into hell, has so much the air of
romance and fiction, as to deserve no mention here.
</p>

<p>
Till the reign of this king, there had been some shadow, at
least, of justice and moderation in Egypt; but in the two following
reigns, violence and cruelty usurped their place.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cheops</hi> and
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cephren</hi>.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. ii. c. 124,
128. Diod. l. i. p. 57.</note> These two princes, who were
truly brothers by the similitude of their manners, seem to
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
have vied with each other which of them should distinguish
himself most, by a barefaced impiety towards the gods, and a
barbarous inhumanity to men. Cheops reigned fifty years,
and his brother Cephren fifty-six years after him. They kept
the temples shut during the whole time of their long reigns;
and forbid the offering of sacrifices under the severest penalties.
On the other hand, they oppressed their subjects by employing
them in the most grievous and useless works; and
sacrificed the lives of numberless multitudes of men, merely to
gratify a senseless ambition of immortalizing their names by
edifices of an enormous magnitude, and a boundless expense.
It is remarkable, that those stately pyramids, which have so
long been the admiration of the whole world, were the effect
of the irreligion and merciless cruelty of those princes.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Mycerinus.</hi><note place='foot'>Herod. l. ii.
p. 139. 140. Diod. p. 58.</note> He was the son of Cheops, but of a character
opposite to that of his father. So far from walking in his
steps, he detested his conduct, and pursued quite different
measures. He again opened the temples of the gods, restored
the sacrifices, did all that lay in his power to comfort his subjects,
and make them forget their past miseries; and believed
himself set over them for no other purpose but to exercise justice,
and to make them taste all the blessings of an equitable
and peaceful administration. He heard their complaints, dried
their tears, alleviated their misery, and thought himself not so
much the master as the father of his people. This procured
him the love of them all. Egypt resounded with his praises,
and his name commanded veneration in all places.
</p>

<p>
One would naturally conclude, that so prudent and humane
a conduct must have drawn down on Mycerinus the protection
of the gods. But it happened far otherwise. His misfortunes
began from the death of a darling and only daughter, in whom
his whole felicity consisted. He ordered extraordinary honours
to be paid to her memory, which were still continued in
Herodotus's time. This historian informs us, that in the city
of Saïs, exquisite odours were burnt, in the day-time, at the
tomb of this princess; and that during the night, a lamp was
kept constantly burning.
</p>

<p>
He was told by an oracle, that his reign would continue but
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
seven years. And as he complained of this to the gods, and
inquired the reason why so long and prosperous a reign had
been granted to his father and uncle, who were equally cruel
and impious, whilst his own, which he had endeavoured so
carefully to render as equitable and mild as it was possible for
him to do, should be so short and unhappy; he was answered,
that these were the very causes of it, it being the will of the
gods, to oppress and afflict Egypt during the space of one
hundred and fifty years, as a punishment for its crimes; and
that his reign, which was to have been like those of the preceding
monarchs, of fifty years' continuance, was shortened on
account of his too great lenity. Mycerinus likewise built a
pyramid, but much inferior in dimensions to that of his father.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Asychis.</hi><note place='foot'>Herod. l. ii.
c. 136.</note> He enacted the law relating to loans, which
forbade a son to borrow money, without giving the dead body
of his father by way of security for it. The law added, that
in case the son took no care to redeem his father's body by
restoring the loan, both himself and his children should be
deprived for ever of the rights of sepulture.
</p>

<p>
He valued himself for having surpassed all his predecessors,
by the building a pyramid of brick, more magnificent, if this
king was to be credited, than any hitherto seen. The following
inscription, by its founder's order, was engraved upon it.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Compare me not with pyramids built of stone; which
I as much excel as jupiter does all the other gods.</hi><note place='foot'>The
remainder of the inscription, as we find it in Herodotus, is&mdash;for men plunging
long poles down to the bottom of the lake, drew bricks (πλίνθος εἴρυσαν) out of
the mud which stuck to them, and gave me this form.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
If we suppose the six preceding reigns (the exact duration
of some of which is not fixed by Herodotus) to comprise one
hundred and seventy years, there will remain an interval of
near three hundred years, to the reign of Sabachus the Ethiopian.
In this interval, I place a few circumstances related in
Holy Scripture.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2991. Ant. J.C. 1013.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Pharaoh</hi>, king of Egypt, gave his daughter in marriage
to Solomon king of Israel; who received her in that
part of Jerusalem called the city of David, till he had
built her a palace.<note place='foot'>1 Kings iii. 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sesach</hi> or Shishak, otherwise called Sesonchis.
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3026. Ant. J.C. 978.</note>
It was to him that Jeroboam fled, to avoid the wrath of
Solomon, who intended to kill him.<note place='foot'>1 Kings xi.
40. and xii.</note> He abode in
Egypt till Solomon's death, and then returned to
Jerusalem, when, putting himself at the head of the
rebels, he won from Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, ten tribes,
over whom he declared himself king.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3033. Ant. J.C. 971.</note>
This Sesach, in the fifth year of the reign of Rehoboam,
marched against Jerusalem, because the Jews had
transgressed against the Lord. He came with twelve
hundred chariots of war, and sixty thousand horse.<note place='foot'>2
Chron. xii. 1-9.</note> He had brought numberless multitudes of people, who were all
Libyans,<note place='foot'>The English version of the Bible says, The Lubims, the
Sukkiims, and the Ethiopians.&mdash;Trans.</note> Troglodytes, and Ethiopians. He
made himself master of all the strongest cities of Judah, and advanced as
far as Jerusalem. Then the king, and the princes of Israel,
having humbled themselves, and implored the protection of
the God of Israel; God told them, by his prophet Shemaiah,
that, because they humbled themselves, he would not utterly
destroy them as they had deserved; but that they should be
the servants of Sesach: in order <q>that they might know the
difference of his service, and the service of the kingdoms of
the country.</q><note place='foot'>Or, of the kingdoms of
the earth.&mdash;Trans.</note> Sesach retired from Jerusalem, after having
plundered the treasures of the house of the Lord, and of the
king's house; he carried off every thing with him, <q>and even
also the three hundred shields of gold which Solomon had
made.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3063. Ant. J.C. 941.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Zerah</hi>, king of Ethiopia, and doubtless of Egypt at the same
time, made war upon Asa king of Judah.<note place='foot'>2 Chron.
xiv. 9-13.</note> His army
consisted of a million of men, and three hundred chariots
of war. Asa marched against him, and drawing
up his army in order of battle, in full reliance on the God whom
he served: <q>Lord,</q> says he, <q>it is nothing for thee to help
whether with many, or with them that have no power. Help
us, O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, and in thy name we
go against this multitude; O Lord, thou art our God, let not
man prevail against thee.</q> A prayer offered up with such
strong faith was heard. God struck the Ethiopians with terror;
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
they fled, and all were irrevocably defeated, being <q>destroyed
before the Lord, and before his host.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Anysis.</hi><note place='foot'>Herod.
l. ii. c. 137. Diod, l. i. p. 59.</note> He was blind, and under his reign
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sabachus</hi>, king of Ethiopia, being encouraged by an oracle,
entered Egypt with a numerous army, and possessed himself
of it. He reigned with great clemency and justice. Instead
of putting to death such criminals as had been sentenced to
die by the judges, he made them repair the causeys, on which
the respective cities to which they belonged were situated.
He built several magnificent temples, and among the rest, one
in the city of Bubastus, of which Herodotus gives a long and
elegant description. After a reign of fifty years, which was the
time appointed by the oracle, he retired voluntarily to his old
kingdom of Ethiopia, and left the throne of Egypt to Anysis,
who, during this time, had concealed himself in the fens.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3279. Ant. J.C. 725.</note> It is
believed that this Sabachus was the same with
So, whose aid was implored by Hoshea, king of
Israel, against Shalmanezer, king of Assyria.<note place='foot'>2 Kings xvii. 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sethon.</hi> He reigned fourteen years.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3285. Ant. J.C. 719.</note>
He is the same with Sevechus, the son of Sabacon, or So, the
Ethiopian, who reigned so long over Egypt. This
prince, so far from discharging the functions of a
king, was ambitious of those of a priest; causing himself
to be consecrated high-priest of Vulcan. Abandoning himself
entirely to superstition, he neglected to defend his kingdom
by force of arms; paying no regard to military men, from a firm
persuasion that he should never have occasion for their assistance;
he, therefore, was so far from endeavouring to gain
their affections, that he deprived them of their privileges, and
even dispossessed them of their revenues of such lands as his
predecessors had given them.
</p>

<p>
He was soon made sensible of their resentment in a war that
broke out suddenly, and from which he delivered himself solely
by a miraculous protection, if Herodotus may be credited, who
intermixes his account of this war with a great many fabulous
particulars. Sanacharib (so Herodotus calls this prince) king
of the Arabians and Assyrians, having entered Egypt with a
numerous army, the Egyptian officers and soldiers refused to
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
march against him. The high priest of Vulcan, being thus
reduced to the greatest extremity, had recourse to his god, who
bid him not despond, but march courageously against the
enemy with the few soldiers he could raise. Sethon obeyed.
A small number of merchants, artificers, and others who were
the dregs of the populace, joined him; and with this handful
of men, he marched to Pelusium, where Sanacharib had pitched
his camp. The night following, a prodigious multitude of rats
entered the camp of the Assyrians, and gnawing to pieces all
their bowstrings, and the thongs of their shields, rendered them
incapable of making the least defence. Being disarmed in
this manner, they were obliged to fly; and they retreated with
the loss of a great part of their forces. Sethon, when he returned
home, ordered a statue of himself to be set up in the
temple of Vulcan, holding in his right hand a rat, and these
words to be inscribed thereon:&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Let the man who beholds
me learn to reverence the gods.</hi><note place='foot'>Ἐς ἐμέ τις ὁρέων. εὐσεβης
ἔστω&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is very obvious that this story, as related here from Herodotus,
is an alteration of that which is told in the second book
of Kings. We there see,<note place='foot'>Chap. xvii.</note>
that Sennacherib, king of the Assyrians,
having subdued all the neighbouring nations, and
made himself master of all the other cities of Judah, resolved
to besiege Hezekiah in Jerusalem, his capital city. The ministers
of this holy king, in spite of his opposition, and the
remonstrances of the prophet Isaiah, who promised them, in
God's name, a sure and certain protection, provided they
would trust in him only, sent secretly to the Egyptians and
Ethiopians for succour. Their armies, being united, marched
to the relief of Jerusalem at the time appointed, and were met
and vanquished by the Assyrian in a pitched battle. He pursued
them into Egypt and entirely laid waste the country.
At his return from thence, the very night before he was to
have given a general assault to Jerusalem, which then seemed
lost to all hopes, the destroying angel made dreadful havoc in
the camp of the Assyrians; destroyed a hundred fourscore
and five thousand men by fire and sword; and proved evidently,
that they had great reason to rely, as Hezekiah had
done, on the promise of the God of Israel.
</p>

<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>

<p>
This is the real fact. But as it was no ways honourable to
the Egyptians, they endeavoured to turn it to their own advantage,
by disguising and corrupting the circumstances of it.
Nevertheless, the footsteps of this history, though so much
defaced, ought yet to be highly valued, as coming from an
historian of so great antiquity and authority as Herodotus.
</p>

<p>
The prophet Isaiah had foretold, at several times, that this
expedition of the Egyptians, which had been concerted, seemingly,
with such prudence, conducted with the greatest skill,
and in which the forces of two powerful empires were united,
in order to relieve the Jews, would not only be of no service
to Jerusalem, but even destructive to Egypt itself, whose
strongest cities would be taken, its territories plundered, and
its inhabitants of all ages and sexes led into captivity. See
the 18th, 19th, 20th, 30th, 31st, &amp;c. chapters of his prophecy.
</p>

<p>
Archbishop Usher and Dean Prideaux suppose that it was
at this period that the ruin of the famous city No-Amon,<note place='foot'>The Vulgate
calls that city Alexandria, to which the Hebrew gives the name
of No-Amon, because Alexandria was afterwards built in the place where this stood.
Dean Prideaux, after Bochart, thinks that it was Thebes, surnamed Diospolis. Indeed,
the Egyptian Amon is the same with Jupiter. But Thebes is not the place
where Alexandria was since built. Perhaps there was another city there, which also
was called No-Amon.&mdash;Trans.</note> spoken of by the prophet Nahum, happened. That
prophet says,<note place='foot'>Nahum iii. 8, 10.</note> that <q>she was carried
away&mdash;that her young children
were dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets&mdash;that the
enemy cast lots for her honourable men, and that all her great
men were bound in chains.</q> He observes, that all these misfortunes
befell that city, when Egypt and Ethiopia were her
strength; which seems to refer clearly enough to the time of
which we are here speaking, when Tharaca and Sethon had
united their forces. However, this opinion is not without some
difficulties, and is contradicted by some learned men. It is
sufficient for me to have hinted it to the reader.
</p>

<p>
Till the reign of Sethon, the Egyptian priests computed
three hundred and forty-one generations of men;<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. ii. c. 142.</note> which make
eleven thousand three hundred and forty years; allowing three
generations to a hundred years. They counted the like number
of priests and kings. The latter, whether gods or men,
had succeeded one another without interruption, under the
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
name of Piromis, an Egyptian word signifying good and virtuous.
The Egyptian priests showed Herodotus three hundred
and forty-one wooden colossal statues of these Piromis,
all ranged in order in a great hall. Such was the folly of the
Egyptians, to lose themselves as it were in a remote antiquity,
to which no other people could dare to pretend.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3299. Ant. J.C. 705.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tharaca.</hi> He it was who joined Sethon, with an Ethiopian
army, to relieve Jerusalem.<note place='foot'>Afric. apud
Syncel. p. 74. Diod l. i. p. 59.</note> After the death of
Sethon, who had sitten fourteen years on the throne,
Tharaca ascended it, and reigned eighteen years.
He was the last Ethiopian king who reigned in Egypt.
</p>

<p>
After his death, the Egyptians, not being able to agree about
the succession, were two years in a state of anarchy, during
which there were great disorders and confusions among them.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3319. Ant. J.C. 685.</note>
At last,<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. ii. c. 147, 152.</note> twelve of the principal noblemen, conspiring together,
seized upon the kingdom, and divided it
amongst themselves into as many parts. It was
agreed by them, that each should govern his own district
with equal power and authority, and that no one should
attempt to invade or seize the dominions of another. They
thought it necessary to make this agreement, and to bind it
with the most dreadful oaths, to elude the prediction of an
oracle, which had foretold, that he among them who should
offer his libation to Vulcan out of a brazen bowl, should gain
the sovereignty of Egypt. They reigned together fifteen years
in the utmost harmony: and to leave a famous monument of
their concord to posterity, they jointly, and at a common expense,
built the famous labyrinth, which was a pile of building
consisting of twelve large palaces, with as many edifices
underground as appeared above it. I have spoken elsewhere
of this labyrinth.
</p>

<p>
One day, as the twelve kings were assisting at a solemn and
periodical sacrifice offered in the temple of Vulcan, the priests,
having presented each of them a golden bowl for the libation,
one was wanting; when Psammetichus,<note place='foot'>He was
one of the twelve.&mdash;Trans.</note> without any design,
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
supplied the want of this bowl with his brazen helmet, (for each
wore one,) and with it performed the ceremony of the libation.
This accident struck the rest of the kings, and recalled to their
memory the prediction of the oracle above mentioned. They
thought it therefore necessary to secure themselves from his
attempts, and therefore, with one consent, banished him into
the fenny parts of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
After Psammetichus had passed some years there, waiting a
favourable opportunity to revenge himself for the affront which
had been put upon him, a courier brought him advice, that
brazen men were landed in Egypt. These were Grecian soldiers,
Carians and Ionians, who had been cast upon the
coasts of Egypt by a storm, and were completely covered with
helmets, cuirasses, and other arms of brass. Psammetichus
immediately called to mind the oracle, which had answered
him, that he should be succoured by brazen men from the sea-coast.
He did not doubt but the prediction was now fulfilled.
He therefore made a league with these strangers; engaged
them with great promises to stay with him; privately levied
other forces; and put these Greeks at their head; when giving
battle to the eleven kings, he defeated them, and remained
sole possessor of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3334. Ant. J.C. 670.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Psammetichus.</hi> As this prince owed his preservation to
the Ionians and Carians, he settled them in Egypt,
(from which all foreigners hitherto had been excluded;)
and, by assigning them sufficient lands and
fixed revenues, he made them forget their native country.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. ii. c. 153, 154.</note>
By his order, Egyptian children were put under their care to
learn the Greek tongue; and on this occasion, and by this
means, the Egyptians began to have a correspondence with the
Greeks; and from that æra, the Egyptian history, which, till
then, had been intermixed with pompous fables, by the artifice
of the priests, begins, according to Herodotus, to speak with
greater truth and certainty.
</p>

<p>
As soon as Psammetichus was settled on the throne, he
engaged in war against the king of Assyria, on the subject of
the boundaries of the two empires. This war was of long continuance.
Ever since Syria had been conquered by the
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
Assyrians, Palestine, being the only country that separated the
two kingdoms, was the subject of continual discord; as afterwards
it was between the Ptolemies and the Seleucidæ. They
were eternally contending for it, and it was alternately won by
the stronger. Psammetichus, seeing himself the peaceable
possessor of all Egypt, and having restored the ancient form
of government,<note place='foot'>This revolution happened about seven years after the
captivity of Manasseh, king of Judah.&mdash;Trans.</note> thought it high time for him
to look to his frontiers, and to secure them against the Assyrian, his neighbour,
whose power increased daily. For this purpose, he entered
Palestine at the head of an army.
</p>

<p>
Perhaps we are to refer to the beginning of this war, an
incident related by Diodorus;<note place='foot'>Lib. i. p.
61.</note> that the Egyptians, provoked
to see the Greeks posted on the right wing by the king himself,
in preference to them, quitted the service, to the number of
upwards of two hundred thousand men, and retired into Ethiopia,
where they met with an advantageous settlement.
</p>

<p>
Be this as it will, Psammetichus entered Palestine,<note place='foot'>Herod. l. ii. c.
157.</note> where his career was stopped by Azotus, one of the principal cities
of the country, which gave him so much trouble, that he was
forced to besiege it twenty-nine years before he could take it.
This is the longest siege mentioned in ancient history.
</p>

<p>
This was anciently one of the five capital cities of the Philistines.
The Egyptians, having seized it some time before,
had fortified it with such care, that it was their strongest bulwark
on that side. Nor could Sennacherib enter Egypt, till
he had first made himself master of this city,<note place='foot'>Isa. xx. 1.</note> which
was taken by Tartan, one of his generals. The Assyrians had possessed
it hitherto; and it was not till after the long siege just now
mentioned, that the Egyptians recovered it.
</p>

<p>
In this period,<note place='foot'>Herod. l. i. c. 105.</note> the Scythians, leaving the
banks of the Palus Mæotis, made an inroad into Media, defeated Cyaxares,
the king of that country, and deprived him of all Upper Asia,
of which they kept possession during twenty-eight years.
They pushed their conquests in Syria as far as to the frontiers
of Egypt. But Psammetichus marching out to meet them,
prevailed so far, by his presents and entreaties, that they
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
advanced no farther, and by that means delivered his kingdom
from these dangerous enemies.
</p>

<p>
Till his reign,<note place='foot'>Herod. l. ii. c. 2, 3.</note> the Egyptians had
imagined themselves to be the most ancient nation upon earth. Psammetichus was
desirous to prove this himself, and he employed a very extraordinary
experiment for this purpose. He commanded (if we
may credit the relation) two children, newly born of poor
parents, to be brought up (in the country) in a hovel, that
was to be kept continually shut. They were committed to
the care of a shepherd, (others say, of nurses, whose tongues
were cut out,) who was to feed them with the milk of goats;
and was commanded not to suffer any person to enter into this
hut, nor himself to speak even a single word in the hearing of
these children. At the expiration of two years, as the shepherd
was one day coming into the hut to feed these children,
they both cried out, with hands extended towards their foster-father,
<foreign rend='italic'>beccos, beccos</foreign>. The shepherd, surprised to hear a
language that was quite new to him, but which they repeated frequently
afterwards, sent advice of this to the king, who ordered
the children to be brought before him, in order that he himself
might be a witness to the truth of what was told him; and accordingly
both of them began, in his presence, to stammer out
the sounds above mentioned. Nothing now was wanting but
to ascertain what nation it was that used this word; and it was
found that the Phrygians called bread by this name. From
this time they were allowed the honour of antiquity, or rather
of priority, which the Egyptians themselves, notwithstanding
their jealousy of it, and the many ages they had possessed this
glory, were obliged to resign to them. As goats were brought
to these children, in order that they might feed upon their
milk, and historians do not say that they were deaf, some are
of opinion that they might have learnt the word <hi rend='italic'>bec</hi>,
or <hi rend='italic'>beccos</hi>,
by mimicking the cry of those creatures.
</p>

<p>
Psammetichus died in the 24th year of Josias, king of Judah,
and was succeeded by his son Nechao.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3388. Ant. J.C. 616.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Nechao.</hi><note place='foot'>He is called Necho in the English
version of the Scriptures.&mdash;Trans.</note> This prince is often mentioned in
Scripture under the name of Pharaoh-Necho.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. ii. c. 158.</note>
</p>

<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>

<p>
He attempted to join the Nile to the Red-Sea, by cutting
a canal from one to the other. The distance which
separates them is at least a thousand stadia.<note place='foot'>Allowing 625 feet (or
125 geometrical paces) to each stadium, the distance will be 118 English miles,
and a little above one-third of a mile. Herodotus says, that this design was
afterwards put in execution by Darius the Persian, b. ii. c. 158.&mdash;Trans.</note>
After a hundred and twenty thousand workmen had lost their lives in this
attempt, Nechao was obliged to desist; the oracle which had
been consulted by him, having answered, that this new canal
would open a passage to the Barbarians (for so the Egyptians
called all other nations) to invade Egypt.
</p>

<p>
Nechao was more successful in another enterprise.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. iv. c.
42.</note> Skilful Phœnician mariners, whom he had taken into his service,
having sailed from the Red-Sea in order to discover the coasts
of Africa, went successfully round it; and the third year after
their setting out, returned to Egypt through the Straits of
Gibraltar. This was a very extraordinary voyage, in an age
when the compass was not known. It was made twenty-one
centuries before Vasco de Gama, a Portuguese, (by discovering
the Cape of Good Hope, in the year 1497,) found out the
very same way to sail to the Indies, by which these Phœnicians
had come from thence into the Mediterranean.
</p>

<p>
The Babylonians and Medes, having destroyed Nineveh,
and with it the empire of the Assyrians, were thereby become
so formidable, that they drew upon themselves the jealousy of
all their neighbours.<note place='foot'>Joseph. <hi rend='italic'>Antiq.</hi> l. x. c.
6. 2 Kings, xxiii. 29, 30. 2 Chron. xxxv. 20-25.</note> Nechao, alarmed at the danger,
advanced to the Euphrates, at the head of a powerful army, in order to
check their progress. Josiah, king of Judah, so famous for
his uncommon piety, observing that he took his route through
Judea, resolved to oppose his passage. With this view, he
raised all the forces of his kingdom, and posted himself in the
valley of Megiddo, (a city on this side Jordan, belonging to
the tribe of Manasseh, and called Magdolus by Herodotus.)
Nechao informed him, by a herald, that his enterprise was not
designed against him; that he had other enemies in view,
and that he had undertaken this war in the name of God, who
was with him; that for this reason he advised Josiah not to
concern himself with this war, for fear lest it otherwise should
turn to his disadvantage. However, Josiah was not moved by
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
these reasons: he was sensible that the bare march of so powerful
an army through Judea, would entirely ruin it. And
besides, he feared that the victor, after the defeat of the Babylonians,
would fall upon him, and dispossess him of part of his
dominions. He therefore marched to engage Nechao; and
was not only overthrown by him, but unfortunately received a
wound, of which he died at Jerusalem, whither he had ordered
himself to be carried.
</p>

<p>
Nechao, animated by this victory, continued his march, and
advanced towards the Euphrates. He defeated the Babylonians;
took Carchemish, a large city in that country; and
securing to himself the possession of it by a strong garrison,
returned to his own kingdom, after having been absent from it
three months.
</p>

<p>
Being informed in his march homeward, that Jehoahaz
had caused himself to be proclaimed king at Jerusalem, without
first asking his consent, he commanded him to meet him
at Riblah in Syria.<note place='foot'>2 Kings xxiii. 33, 35. 2 Chron. xxxvi. 1,
4.</note> The unhappy prince was no sooner arrived
there, than he was put in chains by Nechao's order, and
sent prisoner to Egypt, where he died. From thence, pursuing
his march, he came to Jerusalem, where he placed Eliakim,
(called by him Jehoiakim,) another of Josiah's sons, upon the
throne, in the room of his brother: and imposed an annual
tribute on the land, of a hundred talents of silver, and one
talent of gold.<note place='foot'>The Hebrew silver talent, according to Dr. Cumberland,
is equivalent to 353<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> 11<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi>
10-1/2<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi> so that 100 talents, English money, make
£35,359 7<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi> 6<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi>
The gold talent, according to the same source, is 5075<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>
15<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi> 7-1/2<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi>, so
the amount of the whole tribute was 40,435<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>
3<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi> 1-1/2<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi>&mdash;Trans.</note>
This being done, he returned in triumph to Egypt.
</p>

<p>
Herodotus, mentioning this king's expedition,<note place='foot'>Lib. ii c. 159.</note>
and the victory gained by him at Magdolus,<note place='foot'>Megiddo.&mdash;Trans.</note>
(as he calls it,) says, that he afterwards took the city Cadytis, which he represents
as situated in the mountains of Palestine, and equal in extent
to Sardis, the capital at that time not only of Lydia, but of all
Asia Minor: this description can suit only Jerusalem, which
was situated in the manner above described, and was then the
only city in those parts that could be compared to Sardis. It
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
appears besides from Scripture, that Nechao, after his victory,
made himself master of this capital of Judea; for he was there
in person, when he gave the crown to Jehoiakim. The very
name Cadytis, which in Hebrew signifies the Holy, clearly
denotes the city of Jerusalem, as is proved by the learned Dean
Prideaux.<note place='foot'>From the time that Solomon, by means of his temple, had made
Jerusalem the common place of worship to all Israel, it was distinguished from the rest
of the cities by the epithet <emph>Holy</emph>, and in the Old Testament was called
<foreign rend='italic'>Air Hakkodesh</foreign>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the
city of holiness, or the holy city. It bore this title upon the coins, and the shekel
was inscribed <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem Kedusha</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
Jerusalem the holy. At length Jerusalem, for brevity's sake, was omitted, and only
<foreign rend='italic'>Kedusha</foreign> reserved. The Syriac being the prevailing
language in Herodotus's time, Kedusha, by a change in that dialect of
<hi rend='italic'>sh</hi> into <hi rend='italic'>th</hi>, was made Kedutha; and
Herodotus giving it a Greek termination, it was writ Κάδυτις or Cadytis. Prideaux's
<hi rend='italic'>Connection of the Old and New Testament</hi>,
ol. i. part i. p. 80, 81. 8vo. Edit.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3397. Ant. J.C. 607.</note> Nabopolassar, king of Babylon,
observing that, since the taking of Carchemish by Nechao, all Syria and Palestine
had shaken off their allegiance to him, and that
his years and infirmities would not permit him to
march against the rebels in person, he therefore associated his
son Nabuchodonosor, or Nebuchadnezzar, with him in the
empire, and sent him at the head of an army into those countries.
This young prince vanquished the army of Nechao near
the river Euphrates, recovered Carchemish, and reduced the
revolted provinces to their allegiance, as Jeremiah had foretold.<note place='foot'>Jer.
xlvi. 2.</note> Thus he dispossessed the Egyptians of all that belonged
to them,<note place='foot'>2 Kings, xxiv. 7.</note> from the little
river<note place='foot'>A rivo Ægypti.</note><note place='foot'>This little river of
Egypt, so often mentioned in Scripture as the boundary of
Palestine towards Egypt, was not the Nile, but a small river, which, running through
the desert that lay betwixt those two nations, was anciently the common boundary
of both. So far the land, which had been promised to the posterity of Abraham, and
divided among them by lot, extended. Gen. xv. 18. Josh. xv.
4.&mdash;Trans.</note> of Egypt to the Euphrates, which comprehended all Syria and
Palestine.
</p>

<p>
Nechao dying after he had reigned sixteen years, left the
kingdom to his son.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3404. Ant. J.C. 600.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Psammis.</hi> His reign was but of six years' duration; and
history has left us nothing memorable concerning him,
except that he made an expedition into Ethiopia.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. ii. c.
160.</note>
</p>

<p>
It was to this prince that the Eleans sent a splendid embassy,
after having instituted the Olympic games. They had
established all the regulations, and arranged every circumstance
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
relating to them, with such care, that, in their opinion,
nothing seemed wanting to their perfection, and envy itself
could not find any fault with them. However, they did not
desire so much to have the opinion, as to gain the approbation
of the Egyptians, who were looked upon as the wisest and
most judicious people in the world.<note place='foot'>Herod.
c. 160.</note> Accordingly, the king
assembled the sages of his nation. After every thing had been
heard which could be said in favour of this institution, the
Eleans were asked, whether citizens and foreigners were admitted
indifferently to these games; to which answer was made,
that they were open to every one. To this the Egyptians
replied, that the rules of justice would have been more strictly
observed, had foreigners only been admitted to these combats;
because it was very difficult for the judges, in their award of
the victory and the prize, not to be prejudiced in favour of
their fellow citizens.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3410. Ant. J.C. 594.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Apries.</hi> In Scripture he is called Pharaoh-Hophra. He
succeeded his father Psammis, and reigned twenty-five
years.<note place='foot'>Jer. xliv. 30.</note>
</p>

<p>
During the first years of his reign, he was as fortunate as
any of his predecessors. He turned his arms against the
island of Cyprus; besieged the city of Sidon by sea and land;
took it, and made himself master of all Phœnicia and Palestine.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. ii. c. 161. Diod. l. i. p. 62.</note>
</p>

<p>
So rapid a success elated his heart to a prodigious degree,
and, as Herodotus informs us, swelled him with so much pride
and infatuation, that he boasted, it was not in the power of
the gods themselves to dethrone him; so great was the idea
he had formed to himself of the firm establishment of his own
power. It was with a view to these arrogant notions, that
Ezekiel put the vain and impious words following into his
mouth: <q>My river is mine own, and I have made it for
myself.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. xxix. 3.</note>
But the true God proved to him afterwards that he had
a master, and that he was a mere man; and he had threatened
him long before, by his prophets, with all the calamities
he was resolved to bring upon him, in order to punish him for
his pride.
</p>

<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>

<p>
Shortly after Hophra had ascended the throne, Zedekiah,
king of Judah, sent an embassy, and concluded an alliance
with him; and the year following, breaking the oath of fidelity
which he had taken to the king of Babylon, he rebelled
openly against him.<note place='foot'>Ezek. xvii. 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
Notwithstanding God had so often forbidden his people to
have recourse to the Egyptians, or to put any confidence in
that people; notwithstanding the repeated calamities which
had ensued upon the various attempts which they had made
to procure assistance from them; they still thought this nation
their most sure refuge in danger, and accordingly could not forbear
applying to it. This they had already done in the reign
of the holy king Hezekiah; which gave occasion to God's
message to his people, by the mouth of his prophet Isaiah:
<q>Wo to them that go down to Egypt for help, and stay on
horses and trust in chariots, because they are many; but they
look not unto the holy One of Israel, neither seek the Lord.
The Egyptians are men, and not God; and their horses flesh,
not spirit: when the Lord shall stretch out his hand, both he
that helpeth shall fall, and he that is holpen shall fall down,
and they shall fail together.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. xxxi.
1, 3.</note> But neither the prophet nor the
king were heard; and nothing but the most fatal experience
could open their eyes, and make them see evidently the truth
of God's threatenings.
</p>

<p>
The Jews behaved in the very same manner on this occasion.
Zedekiah, notwithstanding all the remonstrances of
Jeremiah to the contrary, resolved to conclude an alliance with
the Egyptian monarch; who, puffed up with the success of
his arms, and confident that nothing could resist his power,
declared himself the protector of Israel, and promised to deliver
it from the tyranny of Nabuchodonosor. But God, offended
that a mortal had dared to intrude himself into his place, thus
declared himself to another prophet: <q>Son of man, set thy face
against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and prophesy against him, and
against all Egypt. Speak and say, Thus saith the Lord God,
Behold, I am against thee, Pharaoh, king of Egypt, the great
dragon that lieth in the midst of his rivers, which hath said, My
river is my own, and I have made it for myself. But I will put
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
hooks in thy jaws,</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. xxix. 2, 3, 4.</note>
&amp;c. God, after comparing him to a reed,
which breaks under the man who leans upon it, and wounds
his hand, adds, <q>Behold, I will bring a sword upon thee, and
cut off man and beast out of thee; the land of Egypt shall be
desolate, and they shall know that I am the Lord, because he
hath said, The river is mine, and I have made it.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek.
xxix. 8, 9.</note> The same
prophet, in several succeeding chapters, continues to foretell
the calamities with which Egypt was going to be overwhelmed.<note place='foot'>Chap.
xxix. xxx. xxxi. xxxii.</note>
</p>

<p>
Zedekiah was far from giving credit to these predictions.
When he heard of the approach of the Egyptian army, and
saw Nabuchodonosor raise the siege of Jerusalem, he fancied
that his deliverance was completed, and anticipated a triumph.
His joy, however, was but of short duration; for the Egyptians
seeing the Chaldeans advancing, did not dare to encounter
so numerous and well-disciplined an army.
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3416. Ant. J.C. 588.</note>
They therefore marched back into their own country, and
left the unfortunate Zedekiah exposed to all the dangers
of a war in which they themselves had involved him.<note place='foot'>Jer.
xxxvii. 6, 7.</note>
Nabuchodonosor again sat down before Jerusalem, took and
burnt it, as Jeremiah had prophesied.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3430. Ant. J.C. 574.</note>
Many years after, the chastisements with which God had
threatened Apries (Pharaoh-Hophra) began to fall
upon him.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. ii. c. 161, &amp;c.
Diod. l. i. p. 62.</note> For the Cyrenians, a Greek colony, which
had settled in Africa, between Libya and Egypt, having
seized upon, and divided among themselves, a great part
of the country belonging to the Libyans, forced these nations,
who were thus dispossessed by violence, to throw themselves
into the arms of this prince, and implore his protection. Immediately
Apries sent a mighty army into Libya to oppose the
Cyrenians; but this army being defeated and almost cut to
pieces, the Egyptians imagined that Apries had sent it into
Libya, only to get it destroyed; and by that means to attain
the power of governing his subjects without check or control.
This reflection prompted the Egyptians to shake off the yoke
of a prince, whom they now considered as their enemy. But
Apries, hearing of the rebellion, despatched Amasis, one of his
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
officers, to suppress it, and force the rebels to return to their
allegiance. But the moment Amasis began to address them,
they placed a helmet upon his head, in token of the exalted
dignity to which they intended to raise him, and proclaimed
him king. Amasis having accepted the crown, staid with the
mutineers, and confirmed them in their rebellion.
</p>

<p>
Apries, more exasperated than ever at this news, sent Patarbemis,
another of his great officers, and one of the principal
lords of his court, to put Amasis under an arrest, and bring
him before him; but Patarbemis not being able to carry off
Amasis from the midst of the rebel army, by which he was
surrounded, was treated by Apries, at his return, in the most
ignominious and inhuman manner; for his nose and ears were
cut off by the command of that prince, who never considered,
that only his want of power had prevented his executing his
commission. So barbarous an outrage, committed upon a
person of such high distinction, exasperated the Egyptians so
much, that the greatest part of them joined the rebels, and the
insurrection became general. Apries was now forced to retire
into Upper Egypt, where he supported himself some years,
during which Amasis made himself master of the rest of his
dominions.
</p>

<p>
The troubles which thus distracted Egypt, afforded Nabuchodonosor
a favourable opportunity to invade that kingdom;
and it was God himself who inspired him with the resolution.
This prince, who was the instrument of God's wrath (though he
did not know himself to be so) against a people whom he was
resolved to chastise, had just before taken Tyre, where himself
and his army had laboured under incredible difficulties. To
recompense their toils, God abandoned Egypt to their arms.
It is wonderful to hear the Creator himself revealing his designs
on this subject. There are few passages in Scripture more
remarkable than this, or which give a clearer idea of the supreme
authority which God exercises over all the princes and
kingdoms of the earth: <q>Son of man, (says the Almighty to
his prophet Ezekiel,) Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, caused
his army to serve a great service against Tyrus: every head
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
was made bald, and every shoulder was peeled:<note place='foot'>The baldness of the
heads of the Babylonians was owing to the pressure of their
helmets; and their peeled shoulders to their carrying baskets of earth, and large
pieces of timber, to join Tyre to the continent. Baldness was itself a badge of slavery;
and joined to the peeled shoulders, shows that the conqueror's army sustained
even the most servile labours in this memorable siege.&mdash;Trans.</note> yet had he
no wages, nor his army,<note place='foot'>For the better understanding of
this passage, we are to know that Nabuchodonosor
sustained incredible hardships at the siege of Tyre; and that when the Tyrians
saw themselves closely attacked, the nobles conveyed themselves and their richest
effects on shipboard, and retired into other islands. So that when Nabuchodonosor
took the city, he found nothing to recompense the toil which he had undergone in
this siege. S. Jerom.&mdash;Trans.</note> for the service he had served against
it. Therefore, thus saith the Lord God: Behold, I will give
the land of Egypt unto Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and
he shall take her multitude, and take her spoil, and take her
prey, and it shall be the wages for his army. I have given him
the land of Egypt for his labour, wherewith he served against
it, because they wrought for me, saith the Lord God.</q><note place='foot'>Chap.
xxix. 18, 19, 20.</note> Says
another prophet: <q>He shall array himself with the land of
Egypt, as a shepherd putteth on his garment, and he shall go
forth from thence in peace.</q><note place='foot'>Jerem. xliii.
12.</note> Thus shall he load himself with
booty, and thus cover his own shoulders, and those of his fold,
with all the spoils of Egypt. Noble expressions! which show
the ease with which all the power and riches of a kingdom are
carried away, when God appoints the revolution; and shift, like
a garment, to a new owner, who has no more to do but to take
it, and clothe himself with it.
</p>

<p>
The king of Babylon, taking advantage, therefore, of the intestine
divisions which the rebellion of Amasis had occasioned
in that kingdom, marched thither at the head of his army.
He subdued Egypt from Migdol or Magdol, a town on the
frontiers of the kingdom, as far as Syene, in the opposite extremity
where it borders on Ethiopia. He made a horrible
devastation wherever he came; killed a great number of the
inhabitants, and made such dreadful havoc in the country,
that the damage could not be repaired in forty years. Nabuchodonosor,
having loaded his army with spoils, and conquered
the whole kingdom, came to an accommodation with Amasis;
and leaving him as his viceroy there, returned to Babylon.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Apries</hi> (Pharaoh-Hophra) now leaving the place where he
had concealed himself, advanced towards the sea-coast, (probably
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
on the side of Libya;) and hiring an army of Carians,
Ionians, and other foreigners, he marched against Amasis, to
whom he gave battle near Memphis; but being overcome,
Apries was taken prisoner, carried to the city of Sais, and there
strangled in his own palace.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. ii.
c. 163, 169. Diod. l. i. p. 62.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Almighty had given, by the mouth of his prophets, an
astonishing relation of the several circumstances of this mighty
event. It was He who had broken the power of Apries, which
was once so formidable; and put the sword into the hand of
Nabuchodonosor, in order that he might chastise and humble
that haughty prince. <q>I am,</q> said he, <q>against Pharaoh king
of Egypt, and will break his arms, which were strong, but now
are broken; and I will cause the sword to fall out of his
hand.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. xxx. 22.</note>&mdash;<q>But
I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon,
and put my sword into his hand.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek.
xxx. 24.</note>&mdash;<q>And they shall know
that I am the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. xxx. 25.</note>
</p>

<p>
He enumerates the towns which were to fall a prey to the
victors; Pathros, Zoan, No, (called in the Vulgate Alexandria,)
Sin, Aven, Phibeseth, &amp;c.<note place='foot'>Ver. 14,
17.</note><note place='foot'>I have given the names of these towns
as they stand in our English version. In
the margin are printed against Zoan, Tanis; against Sin, Pelusium; against Aven,
Heliopolis; against Phibeseth, Pubastum, (Bubastus;) and by these last names
they are mentioned in the original French of M. Rollin.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
He takes notice particularly of the unhappy end of the
king, who was to be delivered up to his enemies. Thus
saith the Lord; <q>Behold, I will give Pharaoh-Hophra, the
king of Egypt, into the hand of his enemies, and into the hand
of them that seek his life.</q><note place='foot'>Jerem. xliv. 30.</note>
</p>

<p>
Lastly, he declares, that during forty years the Egyptians
shall be oppressed with every species of calamity, and be reduced
to so deplorable a state, <q>That there shall be no more
a prince of the land of Egypt.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek.
xxx. 13</note> The event verified this prophecy,
which was gradually accomplished. Soon after the expiration
of these forty years, Egypt was made a province of
the Persian empire, to which its kings, though natives of the
country, were tributary, and thus the accomplishment of the
prediction began. It was completely fulfilled on the death of
Nectanebus, the last king of Egyptian extraction, A.M. 3654.
</p>

<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>

<p>
Since that time, Egypt has constantly been governed by
foreigners. For since the ruin of the Persian monarchy, it has
been subject, successively, to the Macedonians, the Romans,
the Saracens, the Mamalukes, and lastly, to the Turks, who
possess it to this day.
</p>

<p>
God was not less punctual in the accomplishment of his
prophecies, with regard to such of his own people as had retired,
contrary to his prohibition, into Egypt, after the taking
of Jerusalem; and had forced Jeremiah along with them.<note place='foot'>Jerem
ch. xliii. xliv.</note> The
instant they had reached Egypt, and were arrived at Tahpanhes,
(or Tanis,) the prophet, after having hid in their presence
(by God's command) stones in a grotto, which was near the
king's palace, declared to them, that Nabuchodonosor should
soon arrive in Egypt, and that God would establish his throne
in that very place; that this prince would lay waste the whole
kingdom, and carry fire and sword into all places; that themselves
should fall into the hand of these cruel enemies, when
one part of them would be massacred, and the rest led captive
to Babylon; that only a very small number should escape the
common desolation, and be at last restored to their country.
All these prophecies had their accomplishment in the appointed
time.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3435. Ant. J.C. 569.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Amasis.</hi> After the death of Apries, Amasis became peaceable
possessor of Egypt, and reigned over it forty
years. He was, according to Plato, a native of the
city of Sais.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>In Tim.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
As he was but of mean extraction, he met with no respect
in the beginning of his reign, but was only contemned by his
subjects:<note place='foot'>Herod. l. ii. c. 172.</note>
he was not insensible of this; but, nevertheless,
thought it his interest to subdue their tempers by management
and address, and win their affections by gentleness and reason.
He had a golden cistern, in which himself and those persons
who were admitted to his table, used to wash their feet: he
melted it down, and had it cast into a statue, and then exposed
the new god to public worship. The people hasted in crowds
to pay their adoration to the statue. The king having assembled
the people, informed them of the vile uses to which this
statue had once been put, which, nevertheless, was now the
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
object of their religious prostrations: the application was easy,
and had the desired success; the people thenceforward paid
the king all the respect that is due to majesty.
</p>

<p>
He always used to devote the whole morning to public
business, to receive petitions, give audience, pronounce sentence,
and hold his councils: the rest of the day was given to
pleasure: and as Amasis, in hours of diversion, was extremely
gay, and seemed to carry his mirth beyond due bounds, his
courtiers took the liberty to represent to him the unsuitableness
of such a behaviour; when he answered, that it was as
impossible for the mind to be always serious and intent upon
business, as for a bow to continue always bent.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. ii. c. 73.</note>
</p>

<p>
It was this king who obliged the inhabitants of every town
to enter their names in a book, kept by the magistrate for that
purpose, with their profession, and manner of living. Solon
inserted this custom among his laws.
</p>

<p>
He built many magnificent temples, especially at Sais, the
place of his birth. Herodotus admired especially a chapel
there formed of one single stone, which was twenty-one cubits<note place='foot'>The
cubit is one foot and almost ten inches. Vide supra.&mdash;Trans.</note>
in front, fourteen in depth, and eight in height; its dimensions
within were not quite so large; it had been brought from
Elephantina, and two thousand men had employed three years
in conveying it along the Nile.
</p>

<p>
Amasis had a great esteem for the Greeks. He granted
them large privileges; and permitted such of them as were
desirous of settling in Egypt, to live in the city of Naucratis,
so famous for its harbour. When the rebuilding of the temple
of Delphi, which had been burnt, was debated on, and the expense
was computed at three hundred talents,<note place='foot'>Or,
58,125<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> sterling.&mdash;Trans.</note> Amasis furnished
the Delphians with a very considerable sum towards
discharging their quota, which was the fourth part of the whole
charge.
</p>

<p>
He made an alliance with the Cyrenians, and married a
wife from among them.
</p>

<p>
He is the only king of Egypt who conquered the island of
Cyprus, and made it tributary.
</p>

<p>
Under his reign Pythagoras came into Egypt, being recommended
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
to that monarch by the famous Polycrates, tyrant of
Samos, who had contracted a friendship with Amasis, and will
be mentioned hereafter. Pythagoras, during his stay in Egypt,
was initiated in all the mysteries of the country; and instructed
by the priests in whatever was most abstruse and important
in their religion. It was here he imbibed his doctrine
of the Metempsychosis, or transmigration of souls.
</p>

<p>
In the expedition in which Cyrus conquered so great a part
of the world, Egypt doubtless was subdued, like the rest of the
provinces; and Xenophon positively declares this in the beginning
of his <hi rend='italic'>Cyropædia</hi>, or institution of that
prince.<note place='foot'>Ἐπῆρξε δὲ καὶ Ἑλλήνων τῶν ἐν τῆ Ἀσίᾳ, καταβὰς δὲ ἐπὶ Θάλατταν,
καὶ Κυπρίωι καὶ Αἰγυπτίων, p. 5. edit. Hutchinsoni.&mdash;Trans.</note> Probably,
after that the forty years of desolation, which had been
foretold by the prophet, were expired, Egypt beginning gradually
to regain strength, Amasis shook off the yoke, and recovered
his liberty.
</p>

<p>
Accordingly, we find, that one of the first cares of Cambyses,
the son of Cyrus, after he had ascended the throne, was
to carry his arms into Egypt. On his arrival there, Amasis
was just dead, and succeeded by his son Psammenitus.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3479. Ant. J.C. 525.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Psammenitus.</hi> Cambyses, after having gained a battle,
pursued the enemy to Memphis; besieged the city,
and soon took it: however, he treated the king with
clemency, granted him his life, and assigned him an
honourable pension; but being informed that he was secretly
concerting measures to reascend his throne, he put him to
death. Psammenitus reigned but six months: all Egypt submitted
immediately to the victor. The particulars of this history
will be related more at large, when I come to that of
Cambyses.
</p>

<p>
Here ends the succession of the Egyptian kings. From this
æra the history of this nation, as was before observed, will be
blended with that of the Persians and Greeks, till the death of
Alexander. At that period, a new monarchy will arise in Egypt,
founded by Ptolemy the son of Lagus, which will continue to
Cleopatra, that is, for about three hundred years. I shall treat
each of these subjects, in the several periods to which they
belong.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Book The Second. The History of the Carthaginians.'/>
<head>Book The Second. The History Of The Carthaginians.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc' level1='Part The First. Character, Manners, Religion, Government.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Part The First. Character, Manners, Religion.'/>
<head>Part The First. Character, Manners, Religion, And Government
Of The Carthaginians.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sect. I. Carthage formed after the Model of Tyre, of
which that City was a Colony.</hi>
The Carthaginians were indebted to the Tyrians, not only for
their origin, but for their manners, language, customs, laws,
religion, and their great application to commerce, as will
appear from every part of the sequel. They spoke the same
language with the Tyrians, and these the same with the Canaanites
and Israelites, that is, the Hebrew tongue, or at least
a language which was entirely derived from it. Their names
had commonly some particular meaning:<note place='foot'>Bochart, part II. l. ii.
c. 16.</note> thus <foreign rend='italic'>Hanno</foreign> signified
<hi rend='italic'>gracious</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>bountiful</hi>; Dido,
<hi rend='italic'>amiable</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>well-beloved</hi>;
Sophonisba, <hi rend='italic'>one who keeps faithfully her husband's secrets</hi>.
From a spirit of religion, they likewise joined the name of
God to their own, conformably to the genius of the Hebrews.
Hannibal, which answers to Hananias, signifies <hi rend='italic'>Baal</hi>,
[or <hi rend='italic'>the Lord</hi>] <hi rend='italic'>has been gracious to me</hi>.
Asdrubal, answering to Azarias, implies, <hi rend='italic'>the Lord will be our
succour</hi>. It is the same with other names, Adherbal, Maharbal, Mastanabal,
&amp;c. The word Pœni, from which Punic is derived, is the same with
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
Phœni, or Phœnicians, because they came originally from
Phœnicia. In the <hi rend='italic'>Pœnulus</hi> of Plautus, is a scene written in
the Punic tongue, which has very much exercised the learned.<note place='foot'>The
first scene of the fifth act, translated into Latin by Petit, in the second
book of his <hi rend='italic'>Miscellanies</hi>.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
But the strict union which always subsisted between the
Phœnicians and Carthaginians, is still more remarkable.
When Cambyses had resolved to make war upon the latter,
the Phœnicians, who formed the chief strength of his fleet,
told him plainly that they could not serve him against their
countrymen; and this declaration obliged that prince to lay
aside his design.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. iii. c.
17-19.</note> The Carthaginians, on their side, were never
forgetful of the country from whence they came, and to which
they owed their origin. They sent regularly every year to
Tyre a ship freighted with presents, as a quit-rent, or acknowledgment
paid to their ancient country; and an annual sacrifice
was offered to the tutelar gods of Tyre, by the Carthaginians,
who considered them as their protectors likewise.<note place='foot'>Polyb.
944. Q. Curt. l. iv. c. 2, 3.</note> They never
failed to send thither the first fruits of their revenues, nor the
tithe of the spoils taken from their enemies, as offerings to
Hercules, one of the principal gods of Tyre and Carthage.
The Tyrians, to secure from Alexander (who was then besieging
their city) what they valued above all things, I mean their
wives and children, sent them to Carthage, where, though at a
time when the inhabitants of the latter were involved in a
furious war, they were received and entertained with such a
kindness and generosity as might be expected from the most
tender and opulent parents. Such uninterrupted testimonies
of a warm and sincere gratitude, do a nation more honour,
than the greatest conquests and the most glorious victories.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sect. II. The Religion of the Carthaginians.</hi>&mdash;It
appears from several passages of the history of Carthage, that
its generals looked upon it as an indispensable duty, to begin
and end all their enterprises with the worship of the gods.
Hamilcar, father of the great Hannibal, before he entered
Spain in a hostile manner, offered up a sacrifice to the gods;
and his son, treading in his steps, before he left Spain, and
marched against Rome, went as far as Cadiz, in order to pay
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
the vows which he had made to Hercules, and to offer up new
ones, in case that god should be propitious to him.<note place='foot'>Liv.
l. xxi. n. 1. Ibid. n. 21.</note> After the
battle of Cannæ, when he acquainted the Carthaginians with
the joyful news, he recommended to them, above all things,
the offering up a solemn thanksgiving to the immortal gods,
for the several victories he had obtained.<note place='foot'>Liv.
l. xxiii. n. 1.</note> <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pro his tantis totque
victoriis verum esse grates diis immortalibus agi haberique.</foreign>
</p>

<p>
Neither did individuals alone pride themselves upon displaying,
on every occasion, this religious care to honour the deity;
but it evidently was the genius and disposition of the whole
nation.
</p>

<p>
Polybius has transmitted to us a treaty of peace concluded
between Philip, son of Demetrius, king of Macedon, and the
Carthaginians, in which the great respect and veneration of the
latter for the deity, and their inherent persuasion that the gods
engage in, and preside over, human affairs, and particularly
over the solemn treaties made in their name and presence, are
strongly displayed.<note place='foot'>Lib. vii. p. 502.</note>
Mention is therein made of five or six
different orders of deities; and this enumeration appears very
extraordinary in a public instrument, such as a treaty of peace
concluded between two nations. I will here present my reader
with the very words of the historian, as it will give some idea
of the Carthaginian theology. <q>This treaty was concluded in
the presence of Jupiter, Juno, and Apollo; in the presence of
the dæmon or genius (δαίμονος) of the Carthaginians, of Hercules
and Iolaus; in the presence of Mars, Triton, and Neptune;
in the presence of all the confederate gods of the Carthaginians;
and of the sun, the moon, and the earth; in the
presence of the rivers, meads, and waters; in the presence of
all those gods who possess Carthage:</q> what should we now say
to an instrument of this kind, in which the tutelar angels and
saints of a kingdom should be introduced?
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginians had two deities to whom they paid a more
particular worship, and who deserve to have some mention
made of them in this place.
</p>

<p>
The first was the goddess Cœlestis, called likewise Urania,
the same with the moon, who was invoked in great calamities,
and particularly in droughts, in order to obtain rain: that
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
very virgin Cœlestis, says Tertullian,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Apolog.</hi>
c. 23.</note> the promiser of rain, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ista
ipsa Virgo Cœlestis pluviarum pollicitatrix</foreign>. Tertullian, speaking
of this goddess and of Æsculapius, makes the heathens of
that age a challenge, which is bold indeed, but at the same time
very glorious to the cause of Christianity; declaring, that any
Christian who may first come, shall oblige these false gods to
confess publicly, that they are but devils; and consenting that
this Christian shall be immediately killed, if he does not extort
such a confession from the mouth of these gods. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nisi se
dæmones confessi fuerint Christiano mentiri non audentes, ibidem
illius Christiani procacissimi sanguinem fundite.</foreign> St. Austin
likewise makes frequent mention of this deity. <q>What is
now,</q> says he,<note place='foot'>In Psalm xcviii.</note>
<q>become of Cœlestis, whose empire was once so
great in Carthage?</q> This was doubtless the same deity whom
Jeremiah calls the queen of heaven;<note place='foot'>Jer. vii.
18. and xliv. 17-25.</note> and who was held in so
much reverence by the Jewish women, that they addressed their
vows, burnt incense, poured out drink-offerings, and made
cakes for her with their own hands, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ut faciant
placentas reginæ cœli</foreign>; and from whom they boasted their having received all
manner of blessings, whilst they regularly paid her this worship;
whereas, since they had failed in it, they had been oppressed
with misfortunes of every kind.
</p>

<p>
The second deity particularly adored by the Carthaginians,
and in whose honour human sacrifices were offered, was Saturn,
known in Scripture by the name of Moloch; and this worship
had passed from Tyre to Carthage. Philo quotes a passage
from Sanchoniathon, which shows that the kings of Tyre, in
great dangers, used to sacrifice their sons to appease the anger
of the gods; and that one of them, by this action, procured
himself divine honours, and was worshipped as a god, under the
name of the planet Saturn; to this doubtless was owing the
fable of Saturn's devouring his own children. Private persons,
when they were desirous of averting any great calamity, took
the same method; and, in imitation of their princes, were so
very superstitious, that such as had no children, purchased
those of the poor, in order that they might not be deprived of
the merit of such a sacrifice. This custom prevailed long
among the Phœnicians and Canaanites, from whom the Israelites
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
borrowed it, though forbidden expressly by heaven. At
first, these children were inhumanly burnt, either in a fiery furnace,
like those in the valley of Hinnon, so often mentioned in
Scripture, or enclosed in a flaming statue of Saturn. The
cries of these unhappy victims were drowned by the uninterrupted
noise of drums and trumpets.<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>de
Superstit.</hi> p. 171.</note> Mothers<note place='foot'>Παρειστήκει δὲ ἡ μήτηρ
ἄτεγκτος καὶ ἀστένακτος, &amp;c. The cruel and pitiless
mother stood by as an unconcerned spectator; a groan or a tear falling from her,
<q>would have been punished by a fine;</q> and still the child must have been sacrificed.
Plut. <hi rend='italic'>de Superstitione</hi>.&mdash;Trans.</note> made it a
merit, and a part of their religion, to view this barbarous spectacle
with dry eyes, and without so much as a groan; and, if a
tear or a sigh stole from them, the sacrifice was less acceptable
to the deity, and all the effects of it were entirely lost. This
strength of mind, or rather savage barbarity, was carried to
such excess, that even mothers would endeavour, with embraces
and kisses, to hush the cries of their children;<note place='foot'>Tertul.
<hi rend='italic'>in Apolog.</hi></note> lest, had
the victim been offered with an unbecoming grace, and in the
midst of tears, it should be displeasing to the god:
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Blanditiis et osculis comprimebant vagitum,
ne flebilis hostia immolaretur.</foreign><note place='foot'>Minut. Felix.</note>
They afterwards contented themselves with making
their children pass through the fire; as appears from several
passages of Scripture, in which they frequently perished.
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginians retained the barbarous custom of offering
human sacrifices to their gods,<note place='foot'>Q. Curt. l.
iv. c. 5.</note> till the ruin of their city:<note place='foot'>It appears from
Tertullian's <hi rend='italic'>Apology</hi>, that this barbarous custom prevailed in
Africa long after the ruin of Carthage. Infantes penès Africam Saturno immolabantur
palàm usque ad proconsulatum Tiberii, qui eosdem sacerdotes in eisdem arboribus
templi sui obumbratricibus scelerum votivis crucibus exposuit, teste militiâ patriæ
nostræ, quæ id ipsum munus illi proconsuli functa est, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
Children were publicly sacrificed to Saturn, down to the proconsulship of Tiberius, who
hanged the sacrificing priests themselves on the trees which shaded their temple, as on
so many crosses, raised to expiate their crimes, of which the militia of our country are
witnesses, who were the actors of this execution at the command of this proconsul.
Tertul. <hi rend='italic'>Apolog.</hi> c. 9. Two learned men are at variance about the
proconsul, and the time of his government. Salmasius confesses his ignorance of both;
but rejects the authority of Scaliger, who, for proconsulatum, reads proconsulem Tiberii,
and thinks Tertullian, when he writ his <hi rend='italic'>Apology</hi>, had forgot his
name. However this be, it is certain that the memory of the incident here related by
Tertullian was then recent, and probably the witnesses of it had not been long
dead.&mdash;Trans.</note> an
action which ought to have been called a sacrilege rather than
a sacrifice. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sacrilegium veriùs quàm sacrum.</foreign>
It was suspended only for some years, from the fear they were under of
drawing upon themselves the indignation and arms of Darius I.
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
king of Persia, who forbade them the offering up of human
sacrifices, and the eating the flesh of dogs: but they soon
resumed this horrid practice, since, in the reign of Xerxes, the
successor to Darius, Gelon the tyrant of Syracuse, having gained
a considerable victory over the Carthaginians in Sicily, among
other conditions of peace which he enjoined them, inserted this
article:<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>de serâ vindic.
deorum</hi>, p. 552.</note> <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> <q>That
no more human sacrifices should be offered to Saturn.</q>
And, doubtless, the practice of the Carthaginians,
on this very occasion, made Gelon use this precaution. For
during the whole engagement, which lasted from morning till
night, Hamilcar, the son of Hanno their general, was perpetually
offering up to the gods sacrifices of living men, who were
thrown in great numbers on a flaming pile; and seeing his
troops routed and put to flight, he himself rushed into it, in
order that he might not survive his own disgrace, and to extinguish,
says St. Ambrose speaking of this action, with his own
blood this sacrilegious fire, when he found that it had not
proved of service to him.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. vii. c.
167.</note><note place='foot'>In ipsos quos adolebat sese præcipitavit ignes, ut eos vel
cruore suo extingueret, quos sibi nihil profuisse cognoverat. S. Amb.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
In times of pestilence<note place='foot'>Cûm peste laborarent, cruentâ sacrorum
religione et scelere pro remedio usi sunt. Quippe homines ut victimas immolabant, et
impuberes (quæ ætas etiam hostium misericordiam provocat) aris admovebant, pacem deorum
sanguine eorum exposcentes, pro quorum vitâ dii maximè rogari solent. Justin, l.
xviii. c. 6. The Gauls as well as Germans used to sacrifice men, if Dionysius and
Tacitus may be credited.&mdash;Trans.</note> they used to sacrifice a great number
of children to their gods, unmoved with pity for a tender age,
which excites compassion in the most cruel enemies; thus seeking
a remedy for their evils in guilt itself; and endeavouring to
appease the gods by the most shocking barbarity.
</p>

<p>
Diodorus relates<note place='foot'>Lib. xx. p. 756.</note> an instance of this cruelty
which strikes the reader with horror. At the time that Agathocles was just
going to besiege Carthage, its inhabitants, seeing the extremity
to which they were reduced, imputed all their misfortunes
to the just anger of Saturn, because that, instead of offering up
children nobly born, who were usually sacrificed to him, there
had been fraudulently substituted in their stead the children
of slaves and foreigners. To atone for this crime, two hundred
children of the best families in Carthage were sacrificed to
Saturn; besides which, upwards of three hundred citizens, from
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
a sense of their guilt of this pretended crime, voluntarily sacrificed
themselves. Diodorus adds, that there was a brazen
statue of Saturn, the hands of which were turned downward;
so that when a child was laid on them, it dropped immediately
into a hollow, where was a fiery furnace.
</p>

<p>
Can this, says Plutarch,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Superstitione</hi>,
p. 169-171.</note> be called worshipping the
gods? Can we be said to entertain an honourable idea of
them, if we suppose that they are pleased with slaughter, thirsty
of human blood, and capable of requiring or accepting such
offerings? Religion, says this judicious author,<note place='foot'>Idem.
<hi rend='italic'>in Camill.</hi> p. 132.</note> is placed
between two rocks, that are equally dangerous to man, and
injurious to the deity, I mean impiety and superstition. The
one, from an affectation of free-thinking, believes nothing; and
the other, from a blind weakness, believes all things. Impiety,
to rid itself of a terror which galls it, denies the very existence
of the gods: whilst superstition, to calm its fears, capriciously
forges gods, which it makes not only the friends, but protectors
and models, of crimes. Had it not been better, says he
further,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Superstitione.</hi></note>
for the Carthaginians to have had originally a Critias,
or a Diagoras, who were open and undisguised atheists, for
their lawgivers, than to have established so frantic and wicked
a religion? Could the Typhons and the giants, (the avowed
enemies of the gods,) had they gained a victory over them,
have established more abominable sacrifices?
</p>

<p>
Such were the sentiments which a heathen entertained of
this part of the Carthaginian worship. One would indeed
scarce believe that mankind were capable of such madness
and frenzy. Men do not generally of themselves entertain
ideas so destructive of all that nature considers as most sacred,
as to sacrifice, to murder, their children with their own hands,
and to throw them in cool blood into fiery furnaces! Sentiments
so unnatural and barbarous, and yet adopted by whole
nations, and even by the most civilized, by the Phœnicians,
Carthaginians, Gauls, Scythians, and even the Greeks and
Romans, and consecrated by custom during a long series of
ages, can have been inspired by him only who was a murderer
from the beginning; and who delights in nothing but the humiliation,
misery, and perdition of man.
</p>

<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sect. III. Form of the Government of Carthage.</hi>&mdash;The
government of Carthage was founded upon principles of
the most consummate wisdom; and it is with reason that
Aristotle<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Rep.</hi> l. ii.
c. 11.</note> ranks this republic in the number of those that were
had in the greatest esteem by the ancients, and which were fit
to serve as a model for others. He grounds his opinion on a
reflection, which does great honour to Carthage, by remarking,
that, from its foundation to his time, (that is, upwards of five
hundred years,) no considerable sedition had disturbed the
peace, nor any tyrant oppressed the liberty of that state. Indeed,
mixed governments, such as that of Carthage, where the
power was divided betwixt the nobles and the people, are subject
to two inconveniences; either of degenerating into an
abuse of liberty by the seditions of the populace, as frequently
happened in Athens, and in all the Grecian republics; or into
the oppression of the public liberty by the tyranny of the
nobles, as in Athens, Syracuse, Corinth, Thebes, and Rome
itself under Sylla and Cæsar. It is, therefore, giving Carthage
the highest praise, to observe, that it had found out the art, by
the wisdom of its laws, and the harmony of the different parts
of its government, to shun, during so long a series of years,
two rocks that are so dangerous, and on which others so often
split.
</p>

<p>
It were to be wished, that some ancient author had left us
an accurate and regular description of the customs and laws of
this famous republic. For want of such assistance, we can
only give our readers a confused and imperfect idea of them,
by collecting the several passages which lie scattered up and
down in authors. Christopher Hendrich has obliged the
learned world in this particular, and his work<note place='foot'>It is entitled,
<hi rend='italic'>Carthago, sive Carthaginensium Respublica</hi>, &amp;c. Francofurti ad
Oderam, ann. 1664.&mdash;Trans.</note> has been of
great service to me.
</p>

<p>
The government of Carthage,<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. iv. p.
493.</note> like that of Sparta and Rome,
united three different authorities, which counterpoised and
gave mutual assistance to one another. These authorities
were, that of the two supreme magistrates, called Suffetes;<note place='foot'>This
name is derived from a word, which, with the Hebrews and Phœnicians,
signifies judges. <foreign rend='italic'>Shophetim.</foreign>&mdash;Trans.</note>
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
that of the Senate; and that of the people. There afterwards
was added the tribunal of One Hundred, which had great
credit and influence in the republic.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Suffetes.</hi>&mdash;The power of the Suffetes was only annual,
and their authority in Carthage answered to that of the consuls
at Rome.<note place='foot'>Ut Romæ consules, sic Carthagine quotannis
annui bini reges creabantur. Corn Nep. <hi rend='italic'>in vitâ Annibalis</hi>,
c. 7. The great Hannibal was one of the Suffetes.&mdash;Trans.</note> In authors they
are frequently called kings, dictators, consuls, because they exercised the functions of
all three. History does not inform us of the manner of their election.
They were empowered to assemble the senate;<note place='foot'>Senatum itaque Suffetes,
quod velut consulare imperium apud eos erat, voca verunt. Liv. l. xxx. n.
7.&mdash;Trans.</note> in which they presided, proposed subjects for deliberation, and
collected the votes;<note place='foot'>Cum Suffetes ad jus dicendum consedissent. Id.
l. xxxiv. n. 62.&mdash;Trans.</note> and they likewise presided in all debates
on matters of importance. Their authority was not limited to
the city, nor confined to civil affairs: they sometimes had the
command of the armies. We find, that when their employment
of Suffetes expired, they were made prætors, which was
a considerable office, since, besides conferring upon them the
privilege of presiding in some causes, it also empowered them
to propose and enact new laws, and call to account the receivers
of the public revenues, as appears from what Livy
relates<note place='foot'>Lib. xxxiii. n. 46, 47.</note> concerning Hannibal on this
head, and which I shall take notice of in the sequel.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Senate.</hi>&mdash;The Senate, composed of persons who were
venerable on account of their age, their experience, their
birth, their riches, and especially their merit, formed the council
of state; and were, if I may use that expression, the soul of
the public deliberations. Their number is not exactly known:
it must, however, have been very great, since a hundred were
selected from it to form a separate assembly, of which I shall
immediately have occasion to speak. In the senate, all affairs
of consequence were debated, the letters from generals read,
the complaints of provinces heard, ambassadors admitted to
audience, and peace or war determined, as is seen on many
occasions.
</p>

<p>
When the sentiments and votes were unanimous, the senate
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
decided supremely, and there lay no appeal from it.<note place='foot'>Arist.
loc. cit.</note> When there was a division, and the senate could not be brought to an
agreement, the affair was then laid before the people, on whom
the power of deciding thereby devolved. The reader will
easily perceive the great wisdom of this regulation: and how
happily it was adapted to crush factions, to produce harmony,
and to enforce and corroborate good counsels; such an assembly
being extremely jealous of its authority, and not easily
prevailed upon to let it pass into other hands. Of this we have a
memorable instance in Polybius.<note place='foot'>Lib. xv.
p. 706, 707.</note> When after the loss of the
battle fought in Africa, at the end of the second Punic war, the
conditions of peace offered by the victor were read in the senate;
Hannibal, observing that one of the senators opposed them,
represented in the strongest terms, that as the safety of the
republic lay at stake, it was of the utmost importance for the
senators to be unanimous in their resolutions, to prevent such
a debate from coming before the people; and he carried his
point. This, doubtless, laid the foundation, in the infancy of
the republic, of the senate's power, and raised its authority to
so great a height. And the same author observes, in another
place,<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. vi. p. 494</note>
that whilst the senate had the administration of affairs,
the state was governed with great wisdom, and was successful
in all its enterprises.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The People.</hi>&mdash;It appears from every thing related hitherto,
that even so low as Aristotle's time, who gives so beautiful a
picture, and bestows so noble an eulogium on the government
of Carthage, the people spontaneously left the care of public
affairs, and the chief administration of them, to the senate:
and this it was which made the republic so powerful. But
things changed afterwards. For the people, grown insolent by
their wealth and conquests, and forgetting that they owed these
blessings to the prudent conduct of the senate, were desirous
of having a share in the government, and arrogated to themselves
almost the whole power. From that period, the public
affairs were transacted wholly by cabals and factions: and
this Polybius assigns as one of the chief causes of the ruin of
Carthage.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Tribunal of the Hundred.</hi>&mdash;This was a body composed
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
of a hundred and four persons; though often, for brevity's sake,
they are called only, the Hundred. These, according to Aristotle,
were the same in Carthage, as the Ephori in Sparta;
whence it appears, that they were instituted to balance the
power of the nobles and senate: but with this difference, that
the Ephori were but five in number, and continued in office
but a year; whereas these were perpetual, and were upwards
of a hundred.
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3609. A. Carth. 487.</note>
It is believed, that these Centumviri
are the same with the hundred judges mentioned by
Justin,<note place='foot'>Lib. ix. c. 2.</note> who were taken out of the senate, and
appointed to inquire into the conduct of their generals. The exorbitant
power of Mago's family, which, by its engrossing the
chief employments both of the state and the army, had thereby
the sole direction and management of all affairs, gave occasion
to this establishment. It was intended as a curb to the authority
of their generals, which, whilst the armies were in the field,
was almost boundless and absolute; but, by this institution, it
became subject to the laws, by the obligation their generals
were under, of giving an account of their actions before these
judges on their return from the campaign: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ut hoc metu
ita in bello imperia cogitarent, ut domi judicia legesque
respicerent.</foreign><note place='foot'>Justin l. xix.</note>
Of these hundred and four judges, five had a particular jurisdiction
superior to that of the rest; but it is not known how
long their authority lasted. This council of five was like the
council of ten in the Venetian senate. A vacancy in their
number could be filled by none but themselves. They also
had the power of choosing those who composed the council of
the hundred. Their authority was very great, and for that
reason none were elected into this office but persons of uncommon
merit; and it was not judged proper to annex any
salary or reward to it; the single motive of the public good,
being thought a tie sufficient to engage honest men to a conscientious
and faithful discharge of their duty. Polybius, in his
account of the taking of New Carthage by Scipio,<note place='foot'>Lib.
x. p. 824 edit Gionov.</note> distinguishes
clearly two orders of magistrates established in Old Carthage;
for he says, that among the prisoners taken at New Carthage,
were two magistrates belonging to the body or assembly of old
men, ἐκ τῆς Γερουσίας: so he calls the council of the hundred;
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
and fifteen of the senate, ἐκ τῆς Συγκλήτου. Livy
mentions<note place='foot'>Lib. xxvi. n. 51. Lib xxx. n.
16.</note> only the fifteen of the senators; but, in another
place, he names the old men; and tells us, that they formed
the most venerable council of the government, and had great
authority in the senate.
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Carthaginenses&mdash;Oratores ad pacem
petendam mittunt triginta seniorum principes. Id erat
sanctius apud illos concilium, maximaque ad ipsum senatum
regendum vis.</foreign><note place='foot'>M. Rollin might have taken notice of some
civil officers who were established at Carthage, with a power like that of the censors
of Rome, to inspect the manners of the citizens. The chief of these officers took from
Hamilcar, the father of Hannibal, a beautiful youth, named Asdrubal, on a report that
Hamilcar was more familiar with this youth than was consistent with modesty. Erat
prætereà cum eo [Amilcare] adolescens illustiis et formosus Hasdrubal, quem nonnulli
diligi turpiùs quàm par erat, ab Amilcare, loquebantur.&mdash;Quo factum est ut à
præfecto morum Hasdrubal cum eo vetaretur esse. Corn. Nep. <hi rend='italic'>in vitâ
Amalcaris</hi>.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
Establishments, though constituted with the greatest wisdom
and the justest harmony of parts, degenerate, however insensibly,
into disorder and the most destructive licentiousness.
These judges, who by the lawful execution of their power were
a terror to transgressors, and the great pillars of justice, abusing
their almost unlimited authority, became so many petty
tyrants.
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3082. A. Carth. 682.</note>
We shall see this verified in the history of the great
Hannibal, who during his prætorship, after his return to Africa,
employed all his influence to reform so horrid an
abuse; and made the authority of these judges,
which before was perpetual, only annual, about two
hundred years from the first founding the tribunal of the One
Hundred.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Defects in the Government of Carthage.</hi>&mdash;Aristotle, among
other reflections made by him on the government of Carthage,
remarks two great defects in it, both which, in his opinion, are
repugnant to the views of a wise lawgiver and the maxims of
sound policy.
</p>

<p>
The first of these defects was, the investing the same person
with different employments, which was considered at Carthage
as a proof of uncommon merit. But Aristotle thinks this practice
highly prejudicial to the public welfare. For, says this
author, a man possessed but of one employment, is much
more capable of acquitting himself well in the execution of it;
because affairs are then examined with greater care, and sooner
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
despatched. We never see, continues our author, either by sea
or land, the same officer commanding two different bodies, or
the same pilot steering two ships. Besides, the welfare of the
state requires that places and preferments should be divided, in
order to excite an emulation among men of merit: whereas the
bestowing of them on one man, too often dazzles him by so
distinguishing a preference, and always fills others with jealousy,
discontent, and murmurs.
</p>

<p>
The second defect taken notice of by Aristotle in the government
of Carthage, was, that in order for a man to attain the
first posts, a certain income was required (besides merit and
noble birth.) By which means, poverty might exclude persons
of the most exalted merit, which he considers as a great evil in
a government. For then, says he, as virtue is wholly disregarded,
and money is all-powerful, because all things are attained
by it, the admiration and desire of riches seize and
corrupt the whole community. Add to this, that when magistrates
and judges are obliged to pay large sums for their employments,
they seem to have a right to reimburse themselves.'
</p>

<p>
There is not, I believe, one instance in all antiquity, to show
that employments, either in the state or the courts of justice,
were sold. The expense, therefore, which Aristotle talks of
here to raise men to preferments in Carthage, must doubtless be
understood of the presents that were given in order to procure
the votes of the electors: a practice, as Polybius observes, very
common at Carthage, where no kind of gain was judged a disgrace.<note place='foot'>Παρὰ
Καρχηδονίοις οὐδὲν αἰσχρὸν τῶν ἀνηκόντων πρὸς κέρδας. Polyb. l. vi. p.
497.&mdash;Trans.</note>
It is, therefore, no wonder, that Aristotle should condemn
a practice whose consequences, it is very plain, may
prove fatal to a government.
</p>

<p>
But in case he pretended that the chief employments of a
state ought to be equally accessible to the rich and the poor,
as he seems to insinuate, his opinion is refuted by the general
practice of the wisest republics; for these, without any way
demeaning or aspersing poverty, have thought that, on this
occasion, the preference ought to be given to riches; because
it is to be presumed that the wealthy have received a better
education, have nobler sentiments, are more out of the
reach of corruption, and less liable to commit base actions;
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
and that even the state of their affairs makes them more affectionate
to the government, more disposed to maintain peace
and order in it, and more interested in suppressing whatever
may tend to sedition and rebellion.
</p>

<p>
Aristotle, in concluding his reflections on the republic of
Carthage, is much pleased with a custom that prevailed there:
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> of sending from time to time colonies into different
countries; and in this manner procuring its citizens commodious
settlements. This provided for the necessities of the poor,
who, equally with the rich, are members of the state: and it
disburdened Carthage of multitudes of lazy, indolent people,
who were its disgrace, and often proved dangerous to it: it
prevented commotions and insurrections, by thus removing
such persons as commonly occasion them; and who being ever
discontented under their present circumstances, are always
ready for innovations and tumults.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sect. IV. Trade of Carthage, the first Source of
its Wealth and Power.</hi>&mdash;Commerce, strictly speaking, was
the occupation of Carthage, the particular object of its industry,
and its peculiar and predominant characteristic. It formed
the greatest strength and the chief support of that commonwealth.
In a word, we may affirm that the power, the conquests,
the credit, and glory of the Carthaginians, all flowed
from their commerce. Situated in the centre of the Mediterranean,
and stretching out their arms eastward and westward,
the extent of their commerce took in all the known world,
and wafted it to the coast of Spain, of Mauritania, of Gaul,
and beyond the straits and pillars of Hercules. They sailed
to all countries, in order to buy at a cheap rate the superfluities
of every nation; which, by the wants of others, became necessaries;
and these they sold to them at the dearest rates.
From Egypt the Carthaginians fetched fine flax, paper, corn,
sails and cables for ships; from the coast of the Red-Sea,
spices, frankincense, perfumes, gold, pearls, and precious
stones; from Tyre and Phoenicia, purple and scarlet, rich stuffs,
tapestry, costly furniture, and divers curious and exquisite
works of art: in a word, they fetched, from various countries,
all things that can supply the necessities, or are capable of
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
contributing to the convenience, the luxury, and the delights of
life. They brought back from the western parts of the world,
in return for the articles carried thither, iron, tin, lead, and
copper: by the sale of these various commodities, they enriched
themselves at the expense of all nations; and put them under
a kind of contribution, which was so much the surer as it was
spontaneous.
</p>

<p>
In thus becoming the factors and agents of all nations, they
had made themselves lords of the sea; the band which held
the east, the west, and south together; and the necessary
channel of their communication: so that Carthage rose to be
the common city, and the centre of the trade, of all those
nations which the sea separated from one another.
</p>

<p>
The most considerable personages of the city were not ashamed
of engaging in trade. They applied themselves to it as industriously
as the meanest citizens; and their great wealth did not
make them less in love with the diligence, patience, and labour,
which are necessary to augment it. To this they owed their empire
of the sea, the splendour of their republic; their being able
to dispute for the superiority with Rome itself; and their exalted
pitch of power, which forced the Romans to carry on a
bloody and doubtful war, for upwards of forty years, in order
to humble and subdue this haughty rival. In short, Rome,
even when triumphant, thought Carthage was not to be entirely
reduced any other way, than by depriving that city of the
resources which it might still derive from its commerce, by
which it had so long been enabled to resist the whole strength
of that mighty republic.
</p>

<p>
However, it is no wonder that, as Carthage came in a manner
out of the greatest school of traffic in the world, I mean
Tyre, she should have been crowned with such rapid and uninterrupted
success. The very vessels on which its founders
had been conveyed into Africa, were afterwards employed by
them in their trade. They began to make settlements upon the
coasts of Spain, in those ports where they unloaded their goods.
The ease with which they had founded these settlements, and
the conveniences they met with, inspired them with the design
of conquering those vast regions; and some time after, <hi rend='italic'>Nova
Carthago</hi>, or New Carthage, gave the Carthaginians an empire
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
in that country, almost equal to that which they enjoyed in
Africa.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sect. V. The Mines of Spain, the second Source
of the Riches and Power of Carthage.</hi>&mdash;Diodorus
justly remarks,<note place='foot'>Lib. iv. p. 312, &amp;c.</note>
that the gold and silver mines found by the
Carthaginians in Spain, were an inexhaustible fund of wealth,
that enabled them to sustain such long wars against the Romans.
The natives had long been ignorant of these treasures
that lay concealed in the bowels of the earth, at least of their
use and value. The Phœnicians took advantage of this ignorance;
and, by bartering some wares of little value for this
precious metal, they amassed infinite wealth. When the Carthaginians
had made themselves masters of the country, they
dug much deeper into the earth than the old inhabitants of
Spain had done, who probably were content with what they
could collect on the surface; and the Romans, when they had
dispossessed the Carthaginians of Spain, profited by their example,
and drew an immense revenue from these mines of gold
and silver.
</p>

<p>
The labour employed to come at these mines, and to dig
the gold and silver out of them, was incredible.<note place='foot'>Diod.
l. iv. p. 312, &amp;c.</note> For the veins
of these metals rarely appeared on the surface; they were to
be sought for and traced through frightful depths, where very
often floods of water stopped the miners, and seemed to defeat all
future pursuits. But avarice is no less patient in undergoing
fatigues, than ingenious in finding expedients. By pumps,
which Archimedes had invented when in Egypt, the Romans
afterwards threw up the water out of these pits, and quite
drained them. Numberless multitudes of slaves perished in
these mines, which were dug to enrich their masters; who
treated them with the utmost barbarity, forced them by heavy
stripes to labour, and gave them no respite either day or
night.
</p>

<p>
Polybius, as quoted by Strabo,<note place='foot'>Lib. iii.
p. 147</note> says, that, in his time, upwards
of forty thousand men were employed in the mines near
<hi rend='italic'>Nova Carthago</hi>; and furnished the Romans every day with
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
twenty-five thousand drachmas, or eight hundred fifty-nine
pounds seven shillings and sixpence.<note place='foot'>25,000 drachmas.&mdash;An Attic
drachma, according to Dr. Bernard=8-1/4<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi> English
money, consequently 25,000=859<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> 7<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi>
6<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi>&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
We must not be surprised to see the Carthaginians, soon
after the greatest defeats, sending fresh and numerous armies
again into the field; fitting out mighty fleets, and supporting,
at a great expense, for many years, wars carried on by them in
far-distant countries. But it must appear surprising to us that
the Romans should be capable of doing the same; they whose
revenues were very inconsiderable before those great conquests
which subjected to them the most powerful nations; and who
had no resources, either from trade, to which they were absolute
strangers, or from gold or silver mines, which were very
rarely found in Italy, in case there were any; and the expenses
of which must, for that very reason, have swallowed up all the
profit. The Romans, in the frugal and simple life they led, in
their zeal for the public welfare, and their love for their country,
possessed funds which were not less ready or secure than
those of Carthage, but at the same time were far more honourable
to their nation.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sect. VI. War.</hi>&mdash;Carthage must be considered as a
trading, and, at the same time, a warlike republic. Its genius
and the nature of its government led it to traffic; and it became
warlike, first, from the necessity the Carthaginians were
under of defending themselves against the neighbouring nations,
and afterwards from a desire of extending their commerce and
empire. This double idea gives us, in my opinion, the true
plan and character of the Carthaginian republic. We have
already spoken of its commerce.
</p>

<p>
The military power of the Carthaginians consisted in their
alliances with kings; in tributary nations, from which they
drew both men and money; in some troops raised from among
their own citizens; and in mercenary soldiers purchased of
neighbouring states, without being themselves obliged to levy
or exercise them, because they were already well disciplined
and inured to the fatigues of war; they making choice, in every
country, of such troops as had the greatest merit and reputation.
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
They drew from Numidia a light, bold, impetuous, and
indefatigable cavalry, which formed the principal strength of
their armies; from the Balearic isles, the most expert slingers
in the world; from Spain, a steady and invincible infantry; from
the coasts of Genoa and Gaul, troops of acknowledged valour;
and from Greece itself, soldiers fit for all the various operations
of war, for the field or the garrisons, for besieging or
defending cities.
</p>

<p>
In this manner the Carthaginians sent out at once powerful
armies, composed of soldiers which were the flower of all the
armies in the universe, without depopulating either their fields
or cities by new levies; without suspending their manufactures,
or disturbing the peaceful artificer; without interrupting their
commerce, or weakening their navy. By venal blood they
possessed themselves of provinces and kingdoms; and made
other nations the instruments of their grandeur and glory, with
no other expense of their own than their money; and even
this furnished from the traffic they carried on with foreign
nations.
</p>

<p>
If the Carthaginians, in the course of a war, sustained some
losses, these were but as so many foreign accidents, which only
grazed, as it were, over the body of the state, but did not make
a deep wound in the bowels or heart of the republic. These
losses were speedily repaired, by sums arising out of a flourishing
commerce, as from a perpetual sinew of war, by which the
government was continually reinforced with new supplies for
the purchase of mercenary forces, who were ready at the first
summons. And from the vast extent of the coasts which the
Carthaginians possessed, it was easy for them to levy, in a very
little time, a sufficient number of sailors and rowers for the
working of their fleets, and to procure able pilots and experienced
captains to conduct them.
</p>

<p>
But as these parts were fortuitously brought together, they
did not adhere by any natural, intimate, or necessary tie. No
common and reciprocal interest united them in such a manner,
as to form a solid and unalterable body. Not one individual
in these mercenary armies, was sincerely interested in the
success of measures, or in the prosperity of the state. They
did not act with the same zeal, nor expose themselves to dangers
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
with equal resolution, for a republic which they considered
as foreign, and which consequently was indifferent to
them, as they would have done for their native country,
whose happiness constitutes that of the several members who
compose it.
</p>

<p>
In great reverses of fortune, the kings in alliance with the
Carthaginians<note place='foot'>As Syphax and Masinissa.</note>
might easily be detached from their interest,
either by that jealousy which the grandeur of a more powerful
neighbour naturally excites; or by the hopes of reaping greater
advantages from a new friend; or by the fear of being involved
in the misfortunes of an old ally.
</p>

<p>
The tributary nations, impatient under the weight and disgrace
of a yoke which had been forced upon their necks,
generally flattered themselves with the hopes of finding one
less galling in changing their masters; or, in case servitude
was unavoidable, the choice was indifferent to them, as will
appear from many instances in the course of this history.
</p>

<p>
The mercenary forces, accustomed to measure their fidelity
by the largeness or continuance of their pay, were ever ready,
on the least discontent, or the slightest expectation of a more
considerable stipend, to desert to the enemy with whom they
had just before fought, and to turn their arms against those
who had invited them to their assistance.
</p>

<p>
Thus the grandeur of the Carthaginians being sustained only
by these foreign supports, was shaken to the very foundation
when they were once taken away. And if to this there happened
to be added an interruption of their commerce, (which
was their sole resource,) arising from the loss of a naval engagement,
they imagined themselves to be on the brink of
ruin, and abandoned themselves to despondency and despair,
as was evidently seen at the end of the first Punic war.
</p>

<p>
Aristotle, in the treatise where he shows the advantages and
defects of the government of Carthage, finds no fault with its
keeping up none but foreign forces; it is therefore probable,
that the Carthaginians did not fall into this practice till a long
time after. But the rebellions which harassed Carthage in its
later years, out to have taught its citizens, that no miseries are
comparable to those of a government which is supported only
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
by foreigners; since neither zeal, security, nor obedience, can
be expected from them.
</p>

<p>
But this was not the case with the republic of Rome. As
the Romans had neither trade nor money, they were not able
to hire forces to push on their conquests with the same rapidity
as the Carthaginians: but then, as they procured every thing
from within themselves; and as all the parts of the state were
intimately united; they had surer resources in great misfortunes
than the Carthaginians. And for this reason they never
once thought of suing for peace after the battle of Cannæ,
as the Carthaginians had done in a less imminent danger.
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginians had, besides, a body of troops (which
was not very numerous) levied from among their own citizens;
and this was a kind of school, in which the flower of their nobility,
and those whose talents and ambition prompted them to
aspire to the first dignities, learned the rudiments of the art of
war. From among these were selected all the general officers,
who were put at the head of the different bodies of their forces,
and had the chief command in the armies. This nation was too
jealous and suspicious to employ foreign generals. But they
were not so distrustful of their own citizens as Rome and
Athens; for the Carthaginians, at the same time that they
invested them with great power, did not guard against the abuse
they might make of it in order to oppress their country. The
command of armies was neither annual, nor limited to any
time, as in the two republics above-mentioned. Many generals
held their commissions for a great number of years, either till
the war or their lives ended; though they were still accountable
to the commonwealth for their conduct; and liable to be
recalled, whenever a real fault, a misfortune, or the superior
interest of a cabal, furnished an opportunity for it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sect. VII. Arts and Sciences.</hi>&mdash;It cannot be said that
the Carthaginians renounced entirely the glory which results
from study and knowledge. The sending of Masinissa, son
of a powerful king,<note place='foot'>King of the Massylians in
Africa.&mdash;Trans.</note> thither for education, gives us room to
believe that Carthage was provided with an excellent school.
The great Hannibal,<note place='foot'>Nepos, <hi rend='italic'>in vitâ
Annibalis</hi>.</note> who in all respects was an ornament to
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
that city, was not unacquainted with polite literature, as will
be seen hereafter. Mago,<note place='foot'>Cic. l. i. <hi rend='italic'>De Orat.</hi>
n. 249. Plin. l. xviii. c. 3.</note> another very celebrated general,
did as much honour to Carthage by his pen as by his victories.
He wrote twenty-eight volumes upon husbandry, which the
Roman senate had in such esteem, that after the taking of
Carthage, when they presented the African princes with the
libraries found there, (another proof that learning was not entirely
banished from Carthage,) they gave orders to have these
books translated into Latin,<note place='foot'>These books were written by Mago in the
Punic language, and translated into Greek by Cassius Dionysius of Utica, from whose
version, we may probably suppose, the Latin was made.&mdash;Trans.</note> though Cato
had before written his books on that subject. There is still extant a Greek version
of a treatise drawn up by Hanno in the Punic tongue,<note place='foot'>Voss.
<hi rend='italic'>de Hist. Gr.</hi> l. iv.</note>
relating to a voyage he made (by order of the senate) with a
considerable fleet round Africa, for the settling of different
colonies in that part of the world. This Hanno is believed to
be more ancient than that person of the same name who lived
in the time of Agathocles.
</p>

<p>
Clitomachus, called in the Punic language Asdrubal, was a
great philosopher.<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>de
fort. Alex.</hi> p. 328. Diog. Laërt. <hi rend='italic'>in
Clitom.</hi></note> He succeeded the famous Carneades,
whose disciple he had been; and maintained in Athens the
honour of the Academic sect. Cicero says,<note place='foot'>Clitomachus, homo et
acutus ut Pœnus et valdè studiosus ac diligens. <hi rend='italic'>Academ.
Quæst.</hi> l. iv. n. 98.&mdash;Trans.</note> that he was a
more sensible man, and fonder of study, than the Carthaginians
generally are. He wrote several books;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Tusc.
Quæst.</hi> l. lii. n. 54.</note> in one of which he
composed a piece to console the unhappy citizens of Carthage,
who, by the ruin of their city, were reduced to slavery.
</p>

<p>
I might rank among, or rather place at the head of, the
writers who have adorned Africa, the celebrated Terence; himself
singly being capable of reflecting infinite honour on his
country by the fame of his productions, if, on this account,
Carthage, the place of his birth, ought not to be less considered
as his country than Rome, where he was educated, and
acquired that purity of style, that delicacy and elegance, which
have gained him the admiration of all succeeding ages. It is
supposed,<note place='foot'>Suet. <hi rend='italic'>in vit.
Terent.</hi></note> that he was carried off when an infant, or at least
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
very young, by the Numidians in their incursions into the
Carthaginian territories, during the war carried on between
these two nations, from the conclusion of the second, to the
beginning of the third Punic war. He was sold for a slave to
Terentius Lucanus, a Roman senator; who, after giving him
an excellent education, gave him his liberty, and called him by
his own name, as was then the custom. He was united in a
very strict friendship with the second Scipio Africanus, and
Lælius; and it was a common report at Rome, that he had
the assistance of these two great men in composing his pieces.
The poet, so far from endeavouring to stifle a report so advantageous
to him, made a merit of it. Only six of his comedies
are extant. Some authors, on the authority of Suetonius, (the
writer of his life,) say, that in his return from Greece, whither
he had made a voyage, he lost a hundred and eight comedies,
which he had translated from Menander, and could not survive
an accident which must naturally afflict him in a sensible
manner; but this incident is not very well founded. Be
this as it may, he died in the year of Rome 594, under the
consulship of Cneius Cornelius Dolabella, and M. Fulvius, at
the age of thirty-five years, and consequently he was born
anno 560.
</p>

<p>
It must yet be confessed, notwithstanding all we have said,
that there ever was a great scarcity of learned men in Carthage,
since it hardly furnished three or four writers of reputation
in upwards of seven hundred years. Although the Carthaginians
held a correspondence with Greece and the most
civilized nations, yet this did not excite them to borrow their
learning, as being foreign to their views of trade and commerce.
Eloquence, poetry, history, seem to have been little
known among them. A Carthaginian philosopher was considered
as a sort of prodigy by the learned. What then would
an astronomer or a geometrician have been thought? I know
not in what esteem physic, which is so highly useful to life,
was held at Carthage; or jurisprudence, so necessary to
society.
</p>

<p>
As works of wit were generally had in so much disregard,
the education of youth must necessarily have been very imperfect
and unpolished. In Carthage, the study and knowledge
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
of youth were for the most part confined to writing, arithmetic,
book-keeping, and the buying and selling goods; in a word, to
whatever related to traffic. But polite learning, history, and
philosophy, were in little repute among them. These were, in
later years, even prohibited by the laws, which expressly forbade
any Carthaginian to learn the Greek tongue, lest it might
qualify them for carrying on a dangerous correspondence with
the enemy, either by letter or word of mouth.<note place='foot'>Factum senatûs consultum
ne quis postea Carthaginensis aut literis Græcis aut sermoni studeret; ne aut loqui
cum hoste, aut scribere sine interprete posset. Justin, l. xx. c. 5. Justin
ascribes the reason of this law to a treasonable correspondence
between one Suniatus, a powerful Carthaginian, and Dionysius the tyrant of Sicily;
the former, by letters written in Greek, (which afterwards fell into the hands of the
Carthaginians,) having informed the tyrant of the war designed against him by his
country, out of hatred to Hanno the general, to whom he was an enemy.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
Now what could be expected from such a cast of mind?
Accordingly there was never seen among them that elegance
of behaviour, that ease and complacency of manners, and those
sentiments of virtue, which are generally the fruits of a liberal
education in all civilized nations. The small number of great
men which this nation has produced, must therefore have owed
their merit to the felicity of their genius, to the singularity of
their talents, and a long experience, without any great assistance
from cultivation and instruction. Hence it was, that the
merit of the greatest men of Carthage was sullied by great
failings, low vices, and cruel passions; and it is rare to meet
with any conspicuous virtue among them without some blemish;
with any virtue of a noble, generous, and amiable kind, and
supported by enlightened and steady principles, such as is
every where found among the Greeks and Romans. The
reader will perceive that I here speak only of the heathen virtues,
and agreeably to the idea which the Pagans entertained
of them.
</p>

<p>
I meet with as few monuments of their skill in arts of a less
noble and necessary kind, as painting and sculpture. I find,
indeed, that they had plundered the conquered nations of a
great many works in both these kinds; but it does not appear
that they themselves had produced many.
</p>

<p>
From what has been said, one cannot help concluding, that
traffic was the predominant inclination, and the peculiar characteristic
of the Carthaginians; that it formed, in a manner,
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
the basis of the state, the soul of the commonwealth, and the
grand spring which gave motion to all their enterprises. The
Carthaginians, in general, were skilful merchants; employed
wholly in traffic; excited strongly by the desire of gain, and
esteeming nothing but riches; directing all their talents, and
placing their chief glory, in amassing them; though at the
same time they scarce knew the purpose for which they were
designed, or how to use them in a noble or worthy manner.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sect. VIII. The Character, Manners, and Qualities
of the Carthaginians.</hi>&mdash;In the enumeration of the various
qualities which Cicero<note place='foot'>Quàm volumus licèt ipsi nos amemus,
tamen nec numero Hispanos, nec robore Gallos, nec calliditate Pœnes,
&amp;c. sed pietate ac religione, &amp;c. omnes gentes nationesque
superavimus. <hi rend='italic'>De Arusp. Resp.</hi> n. 19.&mdash;Trans.</note>
assigns to different nations, as their
distinguishing characteristics, he declares that of the Carthaginians
to be craft, skill, address, industry, cunning,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>calliditas</foreign>;
which doubtless appeared in war, but was still more conspicuous
in the rest of their conduct; and this was joined to
another quality that bears a very near relation to it, and is still
less reputable. Craft and cunning lead naturally to lying,
duplicity, and breach of faith; and these, by accustoming the
mind insensibly to be less scrupulous with regard to the choice
of the means for compassing its designs, prepare it for the
basest frauds and the most perfidious actions. This was also
one of the characteristics of the Carthaginians;<note place='foot'>Carthaginenses
fraudulenti et mendaces&mdash;multis et variis mercatorum advenarumque
sermonibus ad studium fallendi quæstûs cupiditate vocabantur. Cic.
<hi rend='italic'>Orat. ii. in Rull.</hi> n. 94.&mdash;Trans.</note> and it was so
notorious, that to signify any remarkable dishonesty, it was
usual to call it <hi rend='italic'>Punic faith, fides Punica</hi>; and to denote a
knavish, deceitful disposition, no expression was thought more
proper and emphatical than this, a Carthaginian disposition,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Punicum ingenium</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
An excessive thirst for amassing wealth, and an inordinate
love of gain, generally gave occasion in Carthage to the committing
base and unjust actions. One single example will
prove this. During a truce, granted by Scipio to the earnest
entreaties of the Carthaginians, some Roman vessels, being
driven by a storm on the coasts of Carthage, were seized by
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
order of the senate and people,<note place='foot'>Magistratus senatum vocare,
populus in curiæ vestibulo fremere, ne tanta ex
oculis manibusque amitteretur præda. Consensum est ut, &amp;c.
Liv. l. xxx. n. 24.&mdash;Trans.</note> who could not suffer so
tempting a prey to escape them. They were resolved to get
money, though the manner of acquiring it were ever so scandalous.<note place='foot'>A
mountebank had promised the citizens of Carthage to discover to them their
most secret thoughts, in case they would come, on a day appointed, to hear him.
Being all met, he told them, they were desirous to buy cheap and sell dear.
Every man's conscience pleaded guilty to the charge; and the mountebank was
dismissed with applause and laughter. Vili vultis emere, et carè vendere; in quo
dicto levissimi scenici omnes tamen conscientias invenerunt suas, eique vera et
tamen improvisa dicenti admirabili favore plauserunt. S. August. l. xiii.
<hi rend='italic'>de Trinit.</hi> c. 3.&mdash;Trans.</note>
The inhabitants of Carthage, even in St. Austin's
time, (as that Father informs us,) showed on a particular occasion,
that they still retained part of this characteristic.
</p>

<p>
But these were not the only blemishes and faults of the
Carthaginians.<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>de
gen. Rep.</hi> p. 799.</note> They had something austere and savage in
their disposition and genius, a haughty and imperious air, a
sort of ferocity, which, in the first transports of passion, was
deaf to both reason and remonstrances, and plunged brutally
into the utmost excesses of violence. The people, cowardly
and grovelling under apprehensions, were proud and cruel in
their transports; at the same time that they trembled under
their magistrates, they were dreaded in their turn by their
miserable vassals. In this we see the difference which education
makes between one nation and another. The Athenians,
whose city was always considered as the centre of learning,
were naturally jealous of their authority, and difficult to govern;
but still, a fund of good nature and humanity made them compassionate
the misfortunes of others, and be indulgent to the
errors of their leaders. Cleon one day desired the assembly,
in which he presided, to break up, because, as he told them,
he had a sacrifice to offer, and friends to entertain. The
people only laughed at the request, and immediately separated.
Such a liberty, says Plutarch, at Carthage, would have cost
a man his life.
</p>

<p>
Livy makes a like reflection with regard to Terentius Varro.<note place='foot'>Lib.
xxii. n. 61.</note> That general on his return to Rome after the battle of Cannæ,
which had been lost by his ill conduct, was met by persons of
all orders of the state, at some distance from Rome; and
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
thanked by them, for his not having despaired of the commonwealth;
who, says the historian, had he been a general of the
Carthaginians, must have expected the most severe punishment:
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cui, si Carthaginensium ductor fuisset, nihil recusandum
supplicii foret.</foreign> Indeed, a court was established at Carthage,
where the generals were obliged to give an account of
their conduct; and they all were made responsible for the
events of the war. Ill success was punished there as a crime
against the state; and whenever a general lost a battle, he was
almost sure, at his return, of ending his life upon a gibbet.
Such was the furious, cruel, and barbarous disposition of the
Carthaginians, who were always ready to shed the blood of
their citizens as well as of foreigners. The unheard-of tortures
which they made Regulus suffer, are a manifest proof of this
assertion; and their history will furnish us with such instances
of it, as are not to be read without horror.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Part The Second. The History.'/>
<head>Part The Second. The History of the Carthaginians.</head>

<p>
The interval of time between the foundation of Carthage and
its ruin, included seven hundred years, and may be divided
into two parts. The first, which is much the longest and the
least known, (as is ordinary with the beginnings of all states,)
extends to the first Punic war, and takes up five hundred and
eighty-two years. The second, which ends at the destruction
of Carthage, contains but a hundred and eighteen years.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter I. The Foundation of Carthage.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter I. The Foundation of Carthage.'/>
<head>Chapter I. The Foundation of Carthage and its Aggrandizement till the
Time of the first Punic War.</head>

<p>
Carthage in Africa was a colony from Tyre, the most renowned
city at that time for commerce in the world. Tyre
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
had long before transplanted into that country another colony,
which built Utica,<note place='foot'>Utica et Carthago, ambæ inclytæ,
ambæ à Phoenicibus conditæ; illa fato
Catonis insignis, hæc suo. Pompon. Mel. c. 67. Utica and Carthage, both
famous, and both built by Phoenicians; the first renowned by Cato's fate, the last
by its own.&mdash;Trans.</note> made famous by the death of the second
Cato, who, for this reason, is generally called Cato Uticensis.
</p>

<p>
Authors disagree very much with regard to the æra of the
foundation of Carthage.<note place='foot'><p>Our countryman Howel
endeavours to reconcile the three different accounts of
the foundation of Carthage, in the following manner. He says, that the town consisted
of three parts, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> Cothon, or the port and buildings
adjoining to it, which he supposes to have been first built; Megara, built next,
and in respect of Cothon, called the New Town, or Karthada; and Byrsa, or the
citadel, built last of all, and probably by Dido.
</p>
<p>
Cothon, to agree with Appian, was built fifty years before the taking of Troy;
Megara, to correspond with Eusebius, was built a hundred ninety-four years later;
Byrsa, to agree with Menander, (cited by Josephus,) was built a hundred sixty-six
years after Megara.&mdash;Trans.</p></note> It is a difficult matter, and not
very material, to reconcile them; at least, agreeably to the
plan laid down by me, it is sufficient to know, within a few
years, the time in which that city was built.
</p>

<p>
Carthage existed a little above seven hundred years.<note place='foot'>Liv.
<hi rend='italic'>Epit.</hi> l. ii.</note> It
was destroyed under the consulate of Cn. Lentulus, and L.
Mummius, the 603d year of Rome, 3859th of the world, and
145 before Christ. The foundation of it may therefore be
fixed in the year of the world 3158, when Joash was king of
Judah, 98 years before the building of Rome, and 846 before
our Saviour.
</p>

<p>
The foundation of Carthage is ascribed to Elisa, a Tyrian
princess, better known by the name of Dido.<note place='foot'>Justin,
l. xviii. c. 4-6. App. <hi rend='italic'>de bello Pun.</hi> p. 1.
Strab. l. xvii. p. 832. Paterc. l. i. c. 6.</note> Ithobal, king of
Tyre, and father of the famous Jezebel, called in Scripture
Ethbaal, was her great-grandfather. She married her near
relation Acerbas, called otherwise Sicharbas and Sichæus, an
extremely rich prince, and Pygmalion, king of Tyre, was her
brother. This prince having put Sichæus to death, in order
that he might have an opportunity of seizing his immense
wealth, Dido eluded the cruel avarice of her brother, by withdrawing
secretly with all her dead husband's treasures. After
having long wandered, she at last landed on the coast of the
Mediterranean, in the gulf where Utica stood, and in the
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
country of Africa, properly so called, distant almost fifteen<note place='foot'>120
Stadia. Strab. l. xiv. p. 687.&mdash;Trans.</note>
miles from Tunis, so famous at this time for its corsairs; and
there settled with her few followers, after having purchased
some lands from the inhabitants of the country.<note place='foot'>Some authors
say, that Dido put a trick on the natives, by desiring to purchase
of them, for her intended settlement, only so much land as an ox's hide would encompass.
The request was thought too moderate to be denied. She then cut the
hide into the smallest thongs; and, with them, encompassed a large tract of ground,
on which she built a citadel called Byrsa, from the hide. But this tale of the hide
is generally exploded by the learned; who observe that the Hebrew word
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Bosra</foreign>, which signifies a fortification,
gave rise to the Greek word <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Byrsa</foreign>, which
is the name of the citadel of Carthage.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
Many of the neighbouring people, invited by the prospect
of lucre, repaired thither to sell these new comers the necessaries
of life; and shortly after incorporated themselves with
them. These inhabitants, who had been thus gathered from
different places, soon grew very numerous. The citizens of
Utica, considering them as their countrymen, and as descended
from the same common stock, deputed envoys with very considerable
presents, and exhorted them to build a city in the
place where they had first settled. The natives of the country,
from the esteem and respect frequently shown to strangers,
did as much on their part. Thus all things conspiring with
Dido's views, she built her city, which was charged with the
payment of an annual tribute to the Africans for the ground it
stood upon; and called Carthada,<note place='foot'>Kartha Hadath
or Hadtha.&mdash;Trans.</note> or Carthage, a name that,
in the Phoenician and Hebrew tongues, (which have a great
affinity,) signifies the New City. It is said, that when the
foundations were dug, a horse's head was found, which was
thought a good omen, and a presage of the future warlike
genius of that people.<note place='foot'><p>Effodêre loco signum, quod regia Juno<lb/>
Monstrârat, caput acris equi; nam sic fore bello<lb/>
Egregiam, et facilem victu per secula gentem.
</p>
<p>
Virg. <hi rend='italic'>Æn.</hi> l. i. ver. 447.
</p>
<p>
The Tyrians landing near this holy ground,<lb/>
And digging here, a prosp'rous omen found:<lb/>
From under earth a courser's head they drew,<lb/>
Their growth and future fortune to foreshew:<lb/>
This fated sign their foundress Juno gave,<lb/>
Of a soil fruitful, and a people brave.
</p>
<p>
Dryden.&mdash;Trans.</p></note>
</p>

<p>
This princess was afterwards courted by Iarbas king of
Getulia, and threatened with a war in case of refusal. Dido,
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
who had bound herself by an oath not to consent to a second
marriage, being incapable of violating the faith she had sworn
to Sichæus, desired time for deliberation, and for appeasing
the manes of her first husband by sacrifice. Having therefore
ordered a pile to be raised, she ascended it; and drawing
out a dagger which she had concealed under her robe, stabbed
herself with it.<note place='foot'>The story, as it is
told more at large in Justin, (l. xviii. c. 6.) is this&mdash;Iarbas,
king of the Mauritanians, sending for ten of the principal Carthaginians, demanded
Dido in marriage, threatening to declare war against her in case of a refusal: the
ambassadors being afraid to deliver the message of Iarbas, told her, (with Punic
honesty,) <q>that he wanted to have some person sent him, who was capable of civilizing
and polishing himself and his Africans; but that there was no possibility
of finding any Carthaginian, who would be willing to quit his native place and
kindred, for the conversation of Barbarians, who were as savage as the wildest
beasts.</q> Here the queen, with indignation, interrupting them, and asking, <q>if they
were not ashamed to refuse living in any manner which might be beneficial to
their country, to which they owed even their lives?</q> they then delivered the king's
message; and bid her <q>set them a pattern, and sacrifice herself to her country's
welfare.</q> Dido being thus ensnared, called on Sichæus with tears and lamentations,
and answered, <q>that she would go where the fate of her city called her.</q> At the
expiration of three months, she ascended the fatal pile; and with her last breath
told the spectators, that she was going to her husband, as they had ordered
her.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
Virgil has made a great alteration in this history, by supposing
that Æneas, his hero, was contemporary with Dido, though
there was an interval of near three centuries between the one
and the other; Carthage being built three hundred years after
the destruction of Troy. This liberty is very excusable in a
poet, who is not tied to the scrupulous accuracy of an historian;
and we admire, with great reason, the judgment which
he has shown in his plan, when, to interest the Romans (for
whom he wrote) in his subject, he has the art of introducing
into it the implacable hatred which subsisted between Carthage
and Rome, and ingeniously deduces the original of it from the
very remote foundation of those two rival cities.
</p>

<p>
Carthage, whose beginnings, as we have observed, were
very weak at first, grew larger by insensible degrees, in the
country where it was founded. But its dominion was not
long confined to Africa. This ambitious city extended her
conquests into Europe, invaded Sardinia, made herself mistress
of a great part of Sicily, and reduced to her subjection
almost the whole of Spain; and having sent out powerful
colonies into all quarters, enjoyed the empire of the seas for
more than six hundred years; and formed a state which was
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
able to dispute preeminence with the greatest empires of the
world, by her wealth, her commerce, her numerous armies,
her formidable fleets, and, above all, by the courage and
ability of her captains. The dates and circumstances of many
of these conquests are little known. I shall take but a transient
notice of them, in order to enable my readers to form
some idea of the countries, which will be often mentioned in
the course of this history.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Conquests of the Carthaginians in Africa.</hi>&mdash;The first wars
made by the Carthaginians were to free themselves from the
annual tribute which they had engaged to pay the Africans,
for the territory which had been ceded to them.<note place='foot'>Justin,
l. xix. c. 1.</note> This conduct
does them no honour, as the settlement was granted them
upon condition of their paying a tribute. One would be apt
to imagine, that they were desirous of covering the obscurity
of their original, by abolishing this proof of it. But they were
not successful on this occasion. The Africans had justice on
their side, and they prospered accordingly; the war being terminated
by the payment of the tribute.
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginians afterwards carried their arms against
the Moors and Numidians, and gained many conquests over
both.<note place='foot'>Justin, l. xix. c. 2.</note> Being
now emboldened by these happy successes, they
shook off entirely the tribute which gave them so much
uneasiness,<note place='foot'>Afri compulsi stipendium urbis conditæ
Carthageniensibus remittere. Justin, l. xix. c 2.&mdash;Trans.</note>
and possessed themselves of a great part of Africa.
</p>

<p>
About this time there arose a great dispute between
Carthage and Cyrene, on the subject of their respective limits.
Cyrene was a very powerful city, situated on the Mediterranean,
towards the greater Syrtis, and had been built by Battus the
Lacedæmonian.<note place='foot'>Sallust. <hi rend='italic'>de bello Jugurth.</hi> n. 77.
Valer. Max. l. v. c. 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
It was agreed on each side, that two young men should set
out at the same time, from either city; and that the place of
their meeting should be the common boundary of both states.
The Carthaginians (these were two brothers named Philæni)
made the most haste; and their antagonists pretending that
foul play had been used, and that the two brothers had set out
before the time appointed, refused to stand to the agreement
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
unless the two brothers (to remove all suspicion of unfair
dealing) would consent to be buried alive in the place where
they had met. They acquiesced with the proposal; and the
Carthaginians erected, on that spot, two altars to their memories,
and paid them divine honours in their city; and from
that time the place was called the altars of the Philæni, Aræ
Philænorum,<note place='foot'>These altars were not standing in Strabo's time. Some
geographers think Arcadia to be the city which was anciently called Philænorum Aræ;
but others believe it was Naina or Tain, situated a little west of Arcadia, in the
gulf of Sidra.&mdash;Trans.</note> and served as the boundary of the Carthaginian
empire, which extended from thence to the pillars of Hercules.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Conquests of the Carthaginians in Sardinia, &amp;c.</hi>&mdash;History
does not inform us exactly, either of the time when the Carthaginians
entered Sardinia, or of the manner in which they got
possession of it. This island was of great use to them; and
during all their wars supplied them abundantly with provisions.<note place='foot'>Strab.
l. v. p. 224. Diod. l. v. p. 296.</note>
It is separated from Corsica only by a strait of about three
leagues in breadth. The metropolis of the southern and most
fertile part of it, was Caralis or Calaris, now called Cagliari.
On the arrival of the Carthaginians, the natives withdrew to
the mountains in the northern parts of the island, which are
almost inaccessible, and whence the enemy could not dislodge
them.
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginians seized likewise on the Balearic isles, now
called Majorca and Minorca. Port Mahon, (<hi rend='italic'>Portus Magonis</hi>,)
in the latter island, was so called from Mago, a Carthaginian
general, who first made use of, and fortified it. It is not
known who this Mago was; but it is very probable that he was
Hannibal's brother.<note place='foot'>Liv. l. xxviii. n. 37.</note>
This harbour is, at this day, one of the
most considerable in the Mediterranean.
</p>

<p>
These isles furnished the Carthaginians with the most
expert slingers in the world, who did them great service in
battles and sieges.<note place='foot'>Diod. l. v. p. 298. and
l. xix. p. 742. Liv. loco citato.</note> They slang large stones of above a pound
weight; and sometimes threw leaden bullets,<note place='foot'>Liquescit excussa
glans fundâ, et attritu aeris, velut igne, distillat. <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
The ball, when thrown from the sling, dissolves; and, by the friction of the air,
runs as if it was melted by fire. Senec. <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Quæst.</hi>
l. ii. c. 57.&mdash;Trans.</note> with so much
violence, that they would pierce even the strongest helmets,
shields, and cuirasses; and were so dexterous in their aim,
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
that they scarce ever missed the mark. The inhabitants of
these islands were accustomed, from their infancy, to handle
the sling; for which purpose their mothers placed on the bough
of a high tree, the piece of bread designed for their children's
breakfast, who were not allowed a morsel till they had brought
it down with their slings. From this practice, these islands
were called Baleares and Gymnasiæ, by the Greeks,<note place='foot'>Strab.
l. iii. p. 167.</note> because the inhabitants used to exercise themselves so early in
slinging of stones.<note place='foot'>Bochart derives the name of
these islands from two Phoenician words, Baal-jare, or master of
the art of slinging. This strengthens the authority of Strabo,
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> that the inhabitants learnt their art from
the Phœnicians, who were once their masters. Σφενδονῆται ἄριστοι
λέγονται&mdash;ἐξότε Φοίνικες κατέσχον τὰς νήσες. And this is still more
probable, when we consider that both the Hebrews and Phœnicians excelled in this
art. The Balearian slings would annoy an enemy either near at hand, or at a distance.
Every slinger carried three of them in war. One hung from the neck, a
second from the waist, and a third was carried in the hand. To this, give me leave
to add two more observations, (foreign indeed to the present purpose, but relating to
these islands,) which I hope will not be unentertaining to the reader. The first is,
that these islands were once so infested with rabbits, that the inhabitants of it
applied to Rome, either for aid against them, or otherwise desired new habitations,
ἐκβάλλεσθαι γὰρ ὑπὸ τῶν ζώων τέτων, those creatures having ejected them out of their
old ones. Vide Strab. Plin. l. viii. c. 55. The second observation is, that these
islanders were not only expert slingers, but likewise excellent swimmers, which
they are to this day, by the testimony of our countryman Biddulph, who, in his
<hi rend='italic'>Travels</hi>, informs us, that being becalmed near these islands,
a woman swam to him out of one of them, with a basket of fruit to
sell.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Conquests of the Carthaginians in Spain.</hi>&mdash;Before I enter
on the relation of these conquests, I think it proper to give my
readers some idea of Spain.
</p>

<p>
Spain is divided into three parts, Bœtica, Lusitania,
Tarraconensis.<note place='foot'>Cluver, l. ii. c. 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
Bœtica, so called from the river Bœtis,<note place='foot'>Guadalquivir.</note>
was the southern division of it, and comprehended the present kingdom of Granada,
Andalusia, part of New Castile, and Estremadura.
Cadiz, called by the ancients Gades and Gadira, is a town
situated in a small island of the same name, on the western
coast of Andalusia, about nine leagues from Gibraltar. It is
well known that Hercules, having extended his conquests to
this place, halted, from the supposition that he was come to
the extremity of the world.<note place='foot'>Strab. l. iii. p. 171.</note>
He here erected two pillars, as monuments of his victories, pursuant to the custom of
that age. The place has always retained the name, though time has quite
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
destroyed these pillars. Authors are divided in opinion, with
regard to the place where these pillars were erected. Bœtica
was the most fruitful, the wealthiest, and most populous part
of Spain.<note place='foot'>Strab. l. iii. p. 139-142.</note>
It contained two hundred cities, and was inhabited
by the Turdetani, or Turduli. On the banks of the Bœtis
stood three large cities, Castulo towards the source, Corduba
lower down, the native place of Lucan and the two Senecas,
lastly, Hispalis.<note place='foot'>Seville.</note>
</p>

<p>
Lusitania is bounded on the west by the Ocean, on the north
by the river Durius,<note place='foot'>Duero.</note> and on
the south by the river Anas.<note place='foot'>Guadiana.</note>
Between these two rivers is the Tagus. Lusitania was what is
now called Portugal, with part of Old and New Castile.
</p>

<p>
Tarraconensis comprehended the rest of Spain, that is, the
kingdoms of Murcia and Valentia, Catalonia, Arragon, Navarre,
Biscay, the Asturias, Gallicia, the kingdom of Leon, and the
greatest part of the two Castiles. Tarraco,<note place='foot'>Tarragona.</note>
a very considerable city, gave its name to this part of Spain. Pretty near it
lay Barcino.<note place='foot'>Barcelona.</note> Its name gives rise to the conjecture,
that it was built by Hamilcar, surnamed Barca, father of the great
Hannibal. The most renowned nations of Tarraconensis were
the Celtiberi, beyond the river Iberus;<note place='foot'>Ebro.</note> the Cantabri, where
Biscay now lies; the Carpetani, whose capital was Toledo;
the Oretani, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Spain, abounding with mines of gold and silver, and peopled
with a martial race of men, had sufficient to excite both the
avarice and ambition of the Carthaginians, who were more of
a mercantile than of a warlike disposition, from the very genius
and constitution of their republic. They doubtless knew that
their Phœnician ancestors, (as Diodorus relates,)<note place='foot'>Lib.
v. p. 312.</note> taking advantage
of the happy ignorance of the Spaniards, with regard
to the immense riches which were hid in the bowels of their
lands, first took from them these precious treasures, in exchange
for commodities of little value. They likewise foresaw,
that if they could once subdue this country, it would furnish
them abundantly with well-disciplined troops for the conquest
of other nations, as actually happened.
</p>

<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>

<p>
The occasion of the Carthaginians first landing in Spain,
was to assist the inhabitants of Cadiz, who were invaded by the
Spaniards.<note place='foot'>Justin, l. xliv. c. 5. Diod. l.
v. p. 300.</note> That city was a colony from Tyre, as well as Utica
and Carthage, and even more ancient than either of them.
The Tyrians having built it, established there the worship of
Hercules, and erected, in his honour, a magnificent temple,
which became famous in after ages. The success of this first
expedition of the Carthaginians made them desirous of carrying
their arms into Spain.
</p>

<p>
It is not exactly known in what period they entered Spain,
nor how far they extended their first conquests. It is probable
that these were slow in the beginning, as the Carthaginians
had to do with very warlike nations, who defended themselves
with great resolution and courage. Nor could they ever have
accomplished their design, as Strabo observes,<note place='foot'>Lib.
iii. p. 158.</note> had the Spaniards
(united in a body) formed but one state, and mutually
assisted one another. But as every district, every people,
were entirely detached from their neighbours, and had not the
least correspondence nor connection with them, the Carthaginians
were forced to subdue them one after another. This
circumstance occasioned, on one hand, the loss of Spain; but
on the other, protracted the war, and made the conquest of
the country much more difficult.<note place='foot'>Such a division
of Britain retarded, and at the same time facilitated, the conquest
of it to the Romans. Dum singuli pugnant universi vincuntur.
Tacit.&mdash;Trans.</note> Accordingly it has been
observed, that though Spain was the first province which the Romans
invaded on the continent, it was the last they subdued;<note place='foot'>Hispania,
prima Romanis inita Provinciarum quæ quidem continentis sint,
postrema omnium perdomita est. Liv. l. xxviii. p. 12.&mdash;Trans.</note>
and was not entirely subjected to their power, till after having
made a vigorous opposition for upwards of 200 years.
</p>

<p>
It appears from the accounts given by Polybius and Livy,
of the wars of Hamilcar, Asdrubal, and Hannibal in Spain,
which will soon be mentioned, that the arms of the Carthaginians
had not made any considerable progress in that country
before that period, and that the greatest part of Spain was then
unconquered. But in twenty years' time they completed the
conquest of almost the whole country.
</p>

<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>

<p>
At the time that Hannibal set out for Italy, all the coast of
Africa, from the Philænorum Aræ, by the great Syrtis, to the
pillars of Hercules, was subject to the Carthaginians.<note place='foot'>Polyb.
l. iii. p. 192. l. i. p. 9.</note> Passing
through the straits, they had conquered all the western coast
of Spain, along the ocean, as far as the Pyrenean hills. The
coast, which lies on the Mediterranean, had been almost wholly
subdued by them; and it was there they had built Carthagena;
and they were masters of all the country, as far as the river
Iberus, which bounded their dominions. Such was, at that
time, the extent of their empire. In the centre of the country,
some nations had indeed held out against all their efforts, and
could not be subdued by them.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Conquests of the Carthaginians in Sicily.</hi>&mdash;The wars which
the Carthaginians carried on in Sicily are more known. I shall
here relate those which were waged from the reign of Xerxes,
who first prompted the Carthaginians to carry their arms into
Sicily, till the first Punic war. This period includes near two
hundred and twenty years; <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> from the year of the world
3520 to 3738. At the breaking out of these wars, Syracuse,
the most considerable as well as most powerful city of Sicily,
had invested Gelon, Hiero, and Thrasybulus, (three brothers
who succeeded one another,) with the sovereign power. After
their deaths, a democracy or popular government was established
in that city, and subsisted above sixty years. From this time,
the two Dionysius's, Timoleon, and Agathocles, bore the sway
in Syracuse. Pyrrhus was afterwards invited into Sicily, but
he kept possession of it only a few years. Such was the government
of Sicily during the wars of which I am going to
treat. They will give us great light with regard to the power
of the Carthaginians, at the time that they began to be engaged
in war with the Romans.
</p>

<p>
Sicily is the largest and most considerable island in the Mediterranean.
It is of a triangular form, and for that reason
was called Trinacria and Triquetra. The eastern side, which
faces the Ionian or Grecian sea, extends from Cape
Pachynum<note place='foot'>Passaro.</note> to Pelorum.<note place='foot'>Il
Faro.</note> The most celebrated cities on this coast are
Syracuse, Tauromenium, and Messana. The northern coast,
which looks towards Italy, reaches from Cape Pelorum to Cape
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
Lilybæum.<note place='foot'>Cape Boéo.</note> The most noted cities on this coast are
Mylæ, Hymera, Panormus, Eryx, Motya, Lilybæum. The southern
coast, which lies opposite to Africa, extends from Cape Lilybæum
to Pachynum. The most remarkable cities on this
coast are Selinus, Agrigentum, Gela, and Camarina. This
island is separated from Italy by a strait, which is not more
than a mile and a half over, and called the Faro or strait of
Messina, from its contiguity to that city. The passage from
Lilybæum to Africa is but 1500 furlongs,<note place='foot'>Strab.
l. vi. p. 267.</note> that is, about seventy-five leagues.<note place='foot'>This is
Strabo's calculation; but there must be a mistake in the numeral characters,
and what he immediately subjoins, is a proof of this mistake. He says, that
a man, whose eye-sight was good, might, from the coast of Sicily, count the vessels
that came out of the port of Carthage. Is it possible that the eye can carry so far as
60 or 75 leagues? This passage of Strabo, therefore, must be thus corrected. The
passage from Lilybæum to Africa, is only 25 leagues.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3501. A. Carth. 343. Rome, 245. Ant. J.C. 503.</note>
The period in which the Carthaginians first carried their
arms into Sicily is not exactly known.<note place='foot'>Polyb. l iii. p.
245, et seq. edit. Gronov.</note> All we are
certain of is, that they were already possessed of
some part of it, at the time that they entered into a
treaty with the Romans; the same year that the
kings were expelled, and consuls appointed in their
room, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> twenty-eight years before Xerxes invaded
Greece. This treaty, which is the first we find mentioned
to have been made between these two nations, speaks of
Africa and Sardinia as possessed by the Carthaginians;
whereas the conventions with regard to Sicily, relate only to
those parts of the island which were subject to them. By
this treaty it is expressly stipulated, that neither the Romans
nor their allies shall sail beyond the Fair Promontory,<note place='foot'>The
reason of this restraint, according to Polybius, was, the unwillingness of the
Carthaginians to let the Romans have any knowledge of the countries which lay
more to the south, in order that this enterprising people might not hear of
their futility. Polyb. l. iii. p. 247. edit. Gronov.&mdash;Trans.</note> which
was very near Carthage; and that such merchants, as shall
resort to this city for traffic, shall pay only certain duties which
are settled in it.<note place='foot'>Idem, p. 246.</note>
</p>

<p>
It appears by the same treaty, that the Carthaginians were
particularly careful to exclude the Romans from all the countries
subject to them; as well as from the knowledge of what
was transacting in them; as though the Carthaginians, even
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
at that time, had taken umbrage at the rising power of the
Romans; and already harboured in their breasts the secret
seeds of that jealousy and distrust, that were one day to burst
out in long and cruel wars, and a mutual hatred and animosity,
which nothing could extinguish but the ruin of one of the contending
powers.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3520. Ant. J.C. 484.</note>
Some years after the conclusion of this first treaty, the Carthaginians
made an alliance with Xerxes king of Persia.<note place='foot'>Diod.
l. xi. p. 1, 16, &amp; 22.</note>
This prince, who aimed at nothing less than the
total extirpation of the Greeks, whom he considered
as his irreconcilable enemies, thought it would be impossible
for him to succeed in his enterprise without the assistance of
Carthage, whose power was formidable even at that time. The
Carthaginians, who always kept in view the design they entertained
of seizing upon the remainder of Sicily, greedily snatched
the favourable opportunity which now presented itself for their
completing the reduction of it. A treaty was therefore concluded;
wherein it was agreed that the Carthaginians were
to invade, with all their forces, those Greeks who were settled
in Sicily and Italy, while Xerxes should march in person
against Greece itself.
</p>

<p>
The preparations for this war lasted three years. The land
army amounted to no less than three hundred thousand men.
The fleet consisted of two thousand ships of war, and upwards
of three thousand small vessels of burden. Hamilcar, the
most experienced captain of his age, sailed from Carthage with
this formidable army. He landed at Palermo;<note place='foot'>This city
is called in Latin Panormus.&mdash;Trans.</note> and, after
refreshing his troops, he marched against Hymera, a city not
far distant from Palermo, and laid siege to it. Theron, who
commanded in it, seeing himself very much straitened, sent to
Gelon, who had possessed himself of Syracuse. He flew immediately
to his relief, with fifty thousand foot, and five thousand
horse. His arrival infused new courage into the besieged,
who, from that time, made a very vigorous defence.
</p>

<p>
Gelon was an able warrior, and excelled in stratagems. A
courier was brought to him, who had been despatched from
Selinus, a city of Sicily, with a letter for Hamilcar, to inform
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
him of the day when he might expect the cavalry which he
had demanded of them. Gelon drew out an equal number of
his own troops, and sent them from his camp about the time
agreed on. These being admitted into the enemy's camp, as
coming from Selinus, rushed upon Hamilcar, killed him, and
set fire to his ships. In this critical conjuncture, Gelon attacked,
with all his forces, the Carthaginians, who at first
made a gallant resistance. But when the news of their general's
death was brought them, and they saw their fleet in a
blaze, their courage failed them, and they fled. And now a
dreadful slaughter ensued; upwards of a hundred and fifty
thousand being slain. The rest of the army, having retired to
a place where they were in want of every thing, could not
make a long defence, and were forced to surrender at discretion.
This battle was fought the very day of the famous action
of Thermopylæ, in which three hundred Spartans,<note place='foot'>Besides
the 300 Spartans, the Thespians, a people of Bœotia, to the number of
700, fought and died with Leonidas in this memorable battle. Herod. l.
vii. c. 202-222.&mdash;Trans.</note> with the
sacrifice of their lives, disputed Xerxes's entrance into Greece.
</p>

<p>
When the sad news was brought to Carthage of the entire
defeat of the army, consternation, grief, and despair, threw the
whole city into such a confusion and alarm as are not to be
expressed. It was imagined that the enemy was already at
the gates. The Carthaginians, in great reverses of fortune,
always lost their courage, and sunk into the opposite extreme.
Immediately they sent a deputation to Gelon, by which they
desired peace upon any terms. He heard their envoys with
great humanity. The complete victory he had gained, so far
from making him haughty and untractable, had only increased
his modesty and clemency even towards the enemy. He
therefore granted them a peace, without any other condition,
than their paying two thousand<note place='foot'>An Attic silver
talent, according to Dr. Bernard, is 206<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>
5<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi>, consequently 2000 talents is
412,500<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>&mdash;Trans.</note> talents towards the expense
of the war. He likewise required them to build two temples,
where the treaty of this peace should be deposited, and exposed
at all times to public view. The Carthaginians did not
think this a dear purchase of a peace, that was so absolutely
necessary to their affairs, and which they hardly durst hope
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
for. Gisgo, the son of Hamilcar, pursuant to the unjust custom
of the Carthaginians, of ascribing to the general the ill
success of a war, and making him bear the blame of it, was
punished for his father's misfortune, and sent into banishment.
He passed the remainder of his days at Selinus, a city of
Sicily.
</p>

<p>
Gelon, on his return to Syracuse, convened the people,
and invited all the citizens to appear under arms. He himself
entered the assembly, unarmed and without his guards, and
there gave an account of the whole conduct of his life. His
speech met with no other interruption, than the public testimonies
which were given him of gratitude and admiration. So far
from being treated as a tyrant, and the oppressor of his country's
liberty, he was considered as its benefactor and deliverer;
all, with an unanimous voice, proclaimed him king; and the
crown was bestowed, after his death, on his two brothers.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3592. A. Carth. 434. A. Rom. 336. Ant. J.C. 412.</note>
After the memorable defeat of the Athenians before
Syracuse, where Nicias perished with his whole
fleet;<note place='foot'>Diod. l. xiii. p. 169-171. 179-186.</note>
the Segestans, who had declared in favour
of the Athenians against the Syracusans, fearing
the resentment of their enemies, and being attacked
by the inhabitants of Selinus, implored the aid of the
Carthaginians, and put themselves and city under their protection.
At Carthage the people debated some time, what
course it would be proper for them to take, the affair meeting
with great difficulties. On one hand, the Carthaginians were
very desirous to possess themselves of a city which lay so convenient
for them; on the other, they dreaded the power and
forces of Syracuse, which had so lately cut to pieces a numerous
army of the Athenians; and become, by so shining a
victory, more formidable than ever. At last, the lust of empire
prevailed, and the Segestans were promised succours.
</p>

<p>
The conduct of this war was committed to Hannibal, who
at that time was invested with the highest dignity of the state,
being one of the Suffetes. He was grandson to Hamilcar,
who had been defeated by Gelon, and killed before Himera;
and son to Gisgo, who had been condemned to exile. He
left Carthage, animated with an ardent desire of revenging his
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
family and country, and of wiping away the disgrace of the
last defeat. He had a very great army as well as fleet under
his command. He landed at a place called the <hi rend='italic'>Well of Lilybæum</hi>,
which gave its name to a city afterwards built on the
same spot. His first enterprise was the siege of Selinus.
The attack and defence were equally vigorous, the very women
showing a resolution and bravery above their sex. The
city, after making a long resistance, was taken by storm, and
the plunder of it abandoned to the soldiers. The victor exercised
the most horrid cruelties, without showing the least
regard to either age or sex. He permitted such inhabitants
as had fled, to continue in the city after it had been dismantled;
and to till the lands, on condition of their paying a
tribute to the Carthaginians. This city had been built two
hundred and forty-two years.
</p>

<p>
Himera, which he next besieged and took likewise by storm,
after being more cruelly treated than Selinus, was entirely
razed, two hundred and forty years after its foundation. He
forced three thousand prisoners to undergo every kind of
ignominious punishments; and at last murdered them all on
the very spot where his grandfather had been killed by Gelon's
cavalry, to appease and satisfy his manes by the blood of
these unhappy victims.
</p>

<p>
These expeditions being ended, Hannibal returned to Carthage,
on which occasion the whole city came out to meet
him, and received him amidst the most joyful acclamations.
</p>

<p>
These successes reinflamed the desire, and revived the design,
which the Carthaginians had ever entertained, of making
themselves masters of the whole of Sicily.<note place='foot'>Diod.
l. xiii. p. 201-203. 206-211. 226-231.</note> Three years after,
they appointed Hannibal their general a second time; and on
his pleading his great age, and refusing the command of this
war, they gave him for lieutenant, Imilcon, son of Hanno, of
the same family. The preparations for this war were proportioned
to the great design which the Carthaginians had formed.
The fleet and army were soon ready, and set out for Sicily.
The number of their forces, according to Timæus, amounted
to above six-score thousand; and, according to Ephorus, to
three hundred thousand men. The enemy, on their side,
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
were prepared to give the Carthaginians a warm reception.
The Syracusans had sent to all their allies, in order to levy
forces among them; and to all the cities of Sicily, to exhort
them to exert themselves vigorously in defence of their liberties.
</p>

<p>
Agrigentum expected to feel the first fury of the enemy.
This city was prodigiously rich,<note place='foot'>The very
sepulchral monuments showed the magnificence and luxury of this
city, being adorned with statues of birds and horses. But the wealth and boundless
generosity of Gellias, one of its inhabitants, is almost incredible. He entertained the
people with spectacles and feasts; and, during a famine, prevented the citizens
from dying with hunger: he gave portions to poor maidens, and rescued the unfortunate
from want and despair: he had built houses in the city and the country purposely
for the accommodation of strangers, whom he usually dismissed with handsome
presents. Five hundred shipwrecked citizens of Gela, applying to him, were
bountifully relieved; and every man supplied with a cloak and a coat out of his
wardrobe. Diod. l. xiii. Valer. Max. l. iv. c. ult. Empedocles the philosopher, born
in Agrigentum, has a memorable saying concerning his fellow citizens: That the
Agrigentines squandered their money so excessively every day, as if they expected
it could never be exhausted; and built with such solidity and magnificence, as if
they thought they should live for ever.&mdash;Trans.</note> and strongly fortified. It
was situated, as was also Selinus, on that coast of Sicily which
faces Africa. Accordingly, Hannibal opened the campaign
with the siege of this city. Imagining that it was impregnable
except on one side, he directed his whole force to
that quarter. He threw up banks and terraces as high as the
walls: and made use, on this occasion, of the rubbish and
fragments of the tombs standing round the city, which he had
demolished for that purpose. Soon after, the plague infected
the army, and swept away a great number of the soldiers, and
the general himself. The Carthaginians interpreted this disaster
as a punishment inflicted by the gods, who revenged in
this manner the injuries done to the dead, whose ghosts many
fancied they had seen stalking before them in the night. No
more tombs were therefore demolished, prayers were ordered
to be made according to the practice of Carthage; a child
was sacrificed to Saturn, in compliance with a most inhuman
superstitious custom; and many victims were thrown into the
sea in honour of Neptune.
</p>

<p>
The besieged, who at first had gained several advantages,
were at last so pressed by famine, that all hopes of relief seeming
desperate, they resolved to abandon the city. The following
night was fixed on for this purpose. The reader will
naturally image to himself the grief with which these miserable
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
people must be seized, on their being forced to leave their
houses, their rich possessions, and their country; but life was
still dearer to them than all these. Never was a more melancholy
spectacle seen. To omit the rest, a crowd of women,
bathed in tears, were seen dragging after them their helpless
infants, in order to secure them from the brutal fury of the
victor. But the most grievous circumstance was, the necessity
they were under of leaving behind them the aged and sick,
who were unable either to fly or to make the least resistance.
The unhappy exiles arrived at Gela, which was the nearest
city, and there received all the comforts they could expect in
the deplorable condition to which they were reduced.
</p>

<p>
In the mean time, Imilcon entered the city, and murdered
all who were found in it. The plunder was immensely rich,
and such as might be expected from one of the most opulent
cities of Sicily, which contained two hundred thousand inhabitants,
and had never been besieged, nor consequently plundered,
before. A numberless multitude of pictures, vases,
and statues of all kinds, were found here; the citizens having
an exquisite taste for the polite arts. Among other curiosities
was the famous bull<note place='foot'>This bull, with other spoils
here taken, was afterwards restored to the Agrigentines by Scipio,
when he took Carthage in the third Punic war. Cic. <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi>
iv. <hi rend='italic'>in Verrem.</hi> c. 33.&mdash;Trans.</note>
of Phalaris, which was sent to Carthage.
</p>

<p>
The siege of Agrigentum had lasted eight months. Imilcon
made his forces take up their winter-quarters in it, to give
them the necessary refreshment; and left this city (after laying
it entirely in ruins) in the beginning of the spring. He afterwards
besieged Gela, and took it, notwithstanding the succours
which were brought by Dionysius the Tyrant, who had seized
upon the government of Syracuse. Imilcon ended the war by
a treaty with Dionysius. The conditions of it were, that the
Carthaginians, besides their ancient acquisitions in Sicily,
should still possess the country of the Sicanians,<note place='foot'>The Sicanians
and Sicilians were anciently two distinct people.&mdash;Trans.</note> Selinus,
Agrigentum, and Himera; as likewise that of Gela and Camarina,
with leave for the inhabitants to reside in their respective
dismantled cities, on condition of their paying a tribute to
Carthage; that the Leontines, the Messenians, and all the
Sicilians, should retain their own laws, and preserve their
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
liberty and independence: lastly, that the Syracusans should
still continue subject to Dionysius. After this treaty was concluded,
Imilcon returned to Carthage, where the plague still
made dreadful havoc.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3600. A. Carth. 412. A. Rom. 344. Ant. J.C. 404.</note>
Dionysius had concluded the late peace with the Carthaginians
with no other view than to get time to establish
his new authority, and make the necessary preparations
for the war which he meditated against them.<note place='foot'>Diod.
l. xiv. p. 268-278.</note> As he was very sensible how formidable the power of
this state was, he used his utmost endeavours to enable
himself to invade them with success; and his design was wonderfully
well seconded by the zeal of his subjects. The fame of
this prince, the strong desire he had to distinguish himself, the
charms of gain, and the prospect of the rewards which he promised
those who should show the greatest industry; invited,
from all quarters, into Sicily, the most able artists and workmen
at that time in the world. All Syracuse now became in a manner
an immense workshop, in every part of which men were
seen making swords, helmets, shields, and military engines;
and preparing all things necessary for building ships and
fitting out fleets. The invention of vessels with five benches
of oars (or <foreign rend='italic'>Quinqueremes</foreign>) was at that time very recent;
for, till then, those with three alone<note place='foot'>Triremes.</note> had been used.
Dionysius animated the workmen by his presence, and by the applauses
he gave, and the bounty which he bestowed seasonably;
but chiefly by his popular and engaging behaviour, which
excited, more strongly than any other conduct, the industry
and ardour of the workmen;<note place='foot'>Honos alit
artes.</note> and he frequently allowed
those of them who most excelled in their respective arts the
honour to dine with him.
</p>

<p>
When all things were ready, and a great number of forces
had been levied in different countries, he called the Syracusans
together, laid his design before them, and represented to
them that the Carthaginians were the professed enemies to the
Greeks; that they had no less in view than the invasion of all
Sicily; the subjecting all the Grecian cities; and that, in case
their progress was not checked, the Syracusans themselves
would soon be attacked: that the reason why the Carthaginians
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
did not attempt any enterprise, and continued unactive,
was owing entirely to the dreadful havoc made by the plague
among them; which (he observed) was a favourable opportunity,
of which the Syracusans ought to take advantage. Though
the tyranny and the tyrant were equally odious to Syracuse,
yet the hatred the people bore to the Carthaginians prevailed
over all other considerations; and every one, guided more by
the views of an interested policy than by the dictates of justice,
received the speech with applause. Upon this, without
the least complaint made, or any declaration of war, Dionysius
gave up to the fury of the populace the persons and possessions
of the Carthaginians. Great numbers of them resided at
that time in Syracuse, and traded there on the faith of treaties.
The common people ran to their houses, plundered their effects,
and pretended they were sufficiently authorized to exercise
every ignominy, and inflict every kind of punishment on them,
for the cruelties they had exercised against the natives of the
country. And this horrid example of perfidy and inhumanity
was followed throughout the whole island of Sicily. This was
the bloody signal of the war which was declared against them.
Dionysius having thus begun to do himself justice, (in his way,)
sent deputies to Carthage, to require them to restore all the
Sicilian cities to their liberties; and that otherwise, all the Carthaginians
found in them should be treated as enemies. This
news spread a general alarm in Carthage, especially when they
reflected on the sad condition to which they were reduced.
</p>

<p>
Dionysius opened the campaign with the siege of Motya,
which was the magazine of the Carthaginians in Sicily; and he
pushed on the siege with so much vigour, that it was impossible
for Imilcon, the Carthaginian admiral, to relieve it. He
brought forward his engines, battered the place with his battering-rams,
advanced to the wall towers, six stories high (rolled
upon wheels,) and of an equal height with their houses; and
from these he greatly annoyed the besieged, with his Catapultæ,
an engine<note place='foot'>The curious reader will find a
very particular account of it in book xxii. art. ii. sect.
ii.&mdash;Trans.</note> then recently invented, which hurled, with
great violence, numerous volleys of arrows and stones against
the enemy. At last, the city, after a long and vigorous defence,
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
was taken by storm, and all the inhabitants of it put to the
sword, those excepted who took sanctuary in the temples. The
plunder of it was abandoned to the soldiers, and Dionysius,
leaving a strong garrison and a trusty governor in it, returned
to Syracuse.
</p>

<p>
The following year Imilcon being appointed one of the
Suffetes, returned to Sicily with a far greater army than before.<note place='foot'>Diod.
l. xiv. p. 279-295. Justin, l. xix. c. 2, 3.</note>
He landed at Palermo,<note place='foot'>Panormus.&mdash;Trans.</note>
recovered Motya by force, and
took several other cities. Animated by these successes, he advanced
towards Syracuse, with design to besiege it; marching
his infantry by land, whilst his fleet, under the command of
Mago, sailed along the coast.
</p>

<p>
The arrival of Imilcon threw the Syracusans into great consternation.
Above two hundred ships laden with the spoils of
the enemy, and advancing in good order, entered in a kind of
triumph the great harbour, being followed by five hundred
barks. At the same time, the land army, consisting, according
to some authors, of three hundred thousand foot,<note place='foot'>Some authors
say but thirty thousand foot, which is the more probable account,
as the fleet which blocked up the town by sea was so
formidable.&mdash;Trans.</note> and three
thousand horse, was seen marching forward on the other side
of the city. Imilcon pitched his tent in the very temple of
Jupiter; and the rest of the army encamped at twelve furlongs,
or about a mile and a half from the city. Marching up
to it, Imilcon offered battle to the inhabitants, who did not
care to accept the challenge. Imilcon, satisfied at his having
extorted from the Syracusans this confession of their own
weakness and his superiority, returned to his camp; not doubting
but he should soon be master of the city, considering it
already as a certain prey which could not possibly escape him.
For thirty days together, he laid waste the neighbourhood about
Syracuse, and ruined the whole country. He possessed himself
of the suburb of Acradina, and plundered the temples of Ceres
and Proserpine. To fortify his camp, he beat down the tombs
which stood round the city; and, among others, that of Gelon
and his wife Demarata, which was prodigiously magnificent.
</p>

<p>
But these successes were not lasting. All the splendour of
this anticipated triumph vanished in a moment, and taught
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
mankind, says the historian,<note place='foot'>Diodorus.</note>
that the proudest mortal, blasted
sooner or later by a superior power, shall be forced to confess
his own weakness. Whilst Imilcon, now master of almost all
the cities of Sicily, expected to crown his conquests by the
reduction of Syracuse, a contagious distemper seized his army,
and made dreadful havoc in it. It was now the midst of summer,
and the heat that year was excessive. The infection began
among the Africans, multitudes of whom died, without any possibility
of their being relieved. At first, care was taken to inter
the dead; but the number increasing daily, and the infection
spreading very fast, the dead lay unburied, and the sick could
have no assistance. This plague was attended with very uncommon
symptoms, such as violent dysenteries, raging fevers,
burning entrails, acute pains in every part of the body. The
infected were even seized with madness and fury, so that they
would fall upon any persons that came in their way, and tear
them to pieces.
</p>

<p>
Dionysius did not suffer to escape so favourable an opportunity
for attacking the enemy. Being more than half conquered
by the plague, they made but a feeble resistance. The
Carthaginian ships were almost all either taken or burnt. The
inhabitants in general of Syracuse, old men, women, and children,
came pouring out of the city to behold an event which
to them appeared miraculous. With hands lifted up to heaven,
they thanked the tutelar gods of their city, for having avenged
the sanctity of the temples and tombs, which had been so
brutally violated by these barbarians. Night coming on, both
parties retired; when Imilcon, taking the opportunity of this
short suspension of hostilities, sent to Dionysius, requesting
leave to carry back with him the small remains of his shattered
army, with an offer of three hundred talents,<note place='foot'>About
61,800<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> English money.&mdash;Trans.</note> which was
all the specie he had then left. But this permission could
only be obtained for the Carthaginians, with whom Imilcon
stole away in the night, and left the rest to the mercy of the
conqueror.
</p>

<p>
Such was the condition in which this Carthaginian general,
who a few days before had been so proud and haughty, retired
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
from Syracuse. Bitterly bewailing his own fate, and still more
that of his country, he, with the most insolent fury, accused
the gods as the sole authors of his misfortunes. <q>The enemy,</q>
continued he, <q>may indeed rejoice at our misery, but have no
reason to glory in it. We return victorious over the Syracusans,
and are defeated by the plague alone.</q> His greatest
subject of grief, and that which most keenly distressed him,
was his having survived so many gallant soldiers, who had died
in arms. <q>But,</q> added he, <q>the sequel shall make it appear,
whether it is through fear of death, or from the desire of leading
back to their native country the miserable remains of my
fellow-citizens, that I have survived the loss of so many brave
comrades.</q> And in fact, on his arrival at Carthage, which he
found overwhelmed with grief and despair, he entered his house,
shut his doors against the citizens, and even his own children;
and then gave himself the fatal stroke, in compliance with a
practice to which the heathens falsely gave the name of courage,
though it was, in reality, no other than a cowardly despair.
</p>

<p>
But the calamities of this unhappy city did not stop here;
for the Africans, who had ever borne an implacable hatred to
the Carthaginians, but were now exasperated to fury, because
their countrymen had been left behind, and exposed to the
murdering sword of the Syracusans, assemble in the most
frantic manner, sound the alarm, take up arms, and, after
seizing upon Tunis, march directly to Carthage, to the number
of more than two hundred thousand men. The citizens
now gave themselves up for lost. This new incident was considered
by them as the sad effect of the wrath of the gods,
which pursued the guilty wretches even to Carthage. As its inhabitants,
especially in all public calamities, carried their superstition
to the greatest excess, their first care was to appease the
offended gods. Ceres and Proserpine were deities who, till that
time, had never been heard of in Africa. But now, to atone
for the outrage which had been done them in the plundering
of their temples, magnificent statues were erected to their honour;
priests were selected from among the most distinguished
families of the city; sacrifices and victims, according to the
Greek ritual, (if I may use that expression,) were offered up to
them; in a word, nothing was omitted which could be thought
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
conducive in any manner to appease and propitiate the angry
goddesses. After this, the defence of the city was the next
object of their care. Happily for the Carthaginians, this numerous
army had no leader, but was like a body uninformed
with a soul; no provisions nor military engines; no discipline
nor subordination, was seen among them: every man setting
himself up for a general, or claiming an independence on the
rest. Divisions therefore arising in this rabble of an army, and
the famine increasing daily, the individuals of it withdrew to
their respective homes, and delivered Carthage from a dreadful
alarm.
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginians were not discouraged by their late disaster,
but continued their enterprises on Sicily. Mago, their
general, and one of the Suffetes, lost a great battle, in which
he was slain. The Carthaginian chiefs demanded a peace,
which was granted, on condition of their evacuating all Sicily,
and defraying the expenses of the war. They pretended to
accept the terms; but representing that it was not in their
power to deliver up the cities, without first obtaining an order
from their republic, they obtained so long a truce, as gave them
time sufficient for sending to Carthage. They took advantage
of this interval, to raise and discipline new troops, over which
Mago, son of him who had been lately killed, was appointed
general. He was very young, but of great abilities and reputation.
As soon as he arrived in Sicily, at the expiration of
the truce, he gave Dionysius battle; in which Leptines,<note place='foot'>This
Leptines was brother to Dionysius.&mdash;Trans.</note> one
of the generals of the latter, was killed, and upwards of fourteen
thousand Syracusans left dead in the field. By this victory
the Carthaginians obtained an honourable peace, which
left them in the possession of all they had in Sicily, with even
the addition of some strong-holds; besides a thousand talents,<note place='foot'>About
206,000<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>&mdash;Trans.</note>
which were paid to them towards defraying the expenses of
the war.
</p>

<p>
About this time a law was enacted at Carthage, by which
its inhabitants were forbid to learn to write or speak the Greek
language;<note place='foot'>Justin, l. xx. c. 5.</note> in
order to deprive them of the means of corresponding
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
with the enemy, either by word of mouth, or in writing.
This was occasioned by the treachery of a Carthaginian,
who had written in Greek to Dionysius, to give him advice of
the departure of the army from Carthage.
</p>

<p>
Carthage had, soon after, another calamity to struggle with.<note place='foot'>Diod.
l. xv. p. 344.</note> The plague spread in the city, and made terrible havoc. Panic
terrors, and violent fits of frenzy, seized on a sudden the unhappy
sufferers; who sallying, sword in hand, out of their
houses, as if the enemy had taken the city, killed or wounded
all who came in their way. The Africans and Sardinians
would very willingly have taken this opportunity to shake off a
yoke which was so hateful to them; but both were subjected,
and reduced to their allegiance. Dionysius formed at this
time an enterprise, in Sicily, with the same views, which was
equally unsuccessful. He died<note place='foot'>This is the
Dionysius who invited Plato to his court; and who, being afterwards
offended with his freedom, sold him for a slave. Some philosophers came
from Greece to Syracuse in order to redeem their brother, which having done, they
sent him home with this useful lesson: That philosophers ought very rarely, or very
obligingly, to converse with tyrants. This prince had learning, and affected to pass
for a poet: but could not gain that name at the Olympic games, whither he had sent
his verses, to be repeated by his brother Thearides. It had been happy for Dionysus,
had the Athenians entertained no better an opinion of his poetry; for on their
pronouncing him victor, when his poems were repeated in their city, he was raised
to such a transport of joy and intemperance, that both together killed him; and
thus, perhaps, was verified the prediction of the oracle,
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> that he should die when
he had overcome his betters.&mdash;Trans.</note> some time after, and was
succeeded by his son of the same name.
</p>

<p>
We have already taken notice of the first treaty which the
Carthaginians concluded with the Romans. There was another,
which, according to Orosius, was concluded in the 402d year
of the foundation of Rome, and consequently about the time
we are now speaking of. This second treaty was very near the
same with the first, except that the inhabitants of Tyre and
Utica were expressly comprehended in it, and joined with the
Carthaginians.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3656. A. Carth. 498. A. Rom. 400. Ant. J.C. 348.</note>
After the death of the elder Dionysius, Syracuse was involved
in great troubles.<note place='foot'>Diod. l. xvi. p. 459-472. Polyb. l. iii.
p. 178. Plut. <hi rend='italic'>in Timol.</hi></note> Dionysius the younger, who
had been expelled, restored himself by force of arms,
and exercised great cruelties there. One part of the
citizens implored the aid of Icetes, tyrant of the Leontines,
and by descent a Syracusan. This seemed a
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
very favourable opportunity for the Carthaginians to seize
upon all Sicily, and accordingly they sent a mighty fleet thither.
In this extremity, such of the Syracusans as loved their country
best, had recourse to the Corinthians, who had often assisted
them in their dangers; and were, besides, of all the
Grecian nations, the most professed enemies of tyranny, and the
most avowed and most generous assertors of liberty. Accordingly,
the Corinthians sent over Timoleon, a man of great
merit, who had signalized his zeal for the public welfare, by
freeing his country from tyranny, at the expense of his own
family. He set sail with only ten ships, and arriving at Rhegium,
he eluded, by a happy stratagem, the vigilance of the
Carthaginians; who having been informed, by Icetes, of his
voyage and design, wanted to intercept him in his passage to
Sicily.
</p>

<p>
Timoleon had scarce above a thousand soldiers under his
command; and yet, with this handful of men, he marched
boldly to the relief of Syracuse. His small army increased in
proportion as he advanced. The Syracusans were now in a
desperate condition, and quite hopeless. They saw the Carthaginians
masters of the port; Icetes of the city; and Dionysius
of the citadel. Happily, on Timoleon's arrival, Dionysius
having no refuge left, put the citadel into his hands, with all
the forces, arms, and ammunition in it, and escaped, by his
assistance, to Corinth.<note place='foot'>Here he preserved
some resemblance of his former tyranny, by turning schoolmaster;
and exercising a discipline over boys, when he could no longer tyrannize
over men. He had learning, and was once a scholar to Plato, whom he caused to
come again into Sicily, notwithstanding the unworthy treatment he had met with
from Dionysius's father. Philip, king of Macedon, meeting him in the streets of
Corinth, and asking him how he came to lose so considerable a principality as had
been left him by his father; he answered, that his father had indeed left him the
inheritance, but not the fortune which had preserved both himself and that.&mdash;However,
fortune did him no great injury in replacing him on the dunghill, from which
she had raised his father.&mdash;Trans.</note> Timoleon had, by his emissaries,
artfully represented to the foreign soldiers, who (by that error
in the constitution of Carthage, which we have before taken
notice of) formed the principal strength of Mago's army, and
the greatest part of whom were Greeks; that it was astonishing
to see Greeks using their endeavours to make barbarians
masters of Sicily, from whence they, in a very little time, would
pass over into Greece. For could they imagine, that the Carthaginians
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
were come so far, with no other view than to establish
Icetes tyrant of Syracuse? Such discourses being spread
among Mago's soldiers, gave this general very great uneasiness;
and, as he wanted only a pretence to retire, he was glad to
have it believed, that his forces were going to betray and desert
him; and upon this, he sailed with his fleet out of the
harbour, and steered for Carthage. Icetes, after his departure,
could not hold out long against the Corinthians; so that they
now got entire possession of the whole city.
</p>

<p>
Mago, on his arrival at Carthage, was impeached, but he
prevented the execution of the sentence passed upon him, by
a voluntary death. His body was hung upon a gallows, and
exposed as a public spectacle to the people. New forces
were levied at Carthage, and a greater and more powerful fleet
than the former was sent to Sicily.<note place='foot'>Plut. p.
248-250.</note> It consisted of two hundred
ships of war, besides a thousand transports; and the army
amounted to upwards of seventy thousand men. They landed
at Lilybæum, under the command of Hamilcar and Hannibal,
and resolved to attack the Corinthians first. Timoleon did
not wait for, but marched out to meet them. But such was
the consternation of Syracuse, that, of all the forces which
were in that city, only three thousand Syracusans and four
thousand mercenaries followed him; and even of these latter a
thousand deserted upon the march, through fear of the danger
they were going to encounter. Timoleon, however, was not
discouraged; but exhorting the remainder of his forces to
exert themselves courageously for the safety and liberties of
their allies, he led them against the enemy, whose rendezvous
he had been informed was on the banks of the little river Crimisus.
It appeared, at the first reflection, madness to attack
an army so numerous as that of the enemy, with only four or
five thousand foot, and a thousand horse; but Timoleon, who
knew that bravery, conducted by prudence, is superior to number,
relied on the courage of his soldiers, who seemed resolved
to die rather than yield, and with ardour demanded to be led
against the enemy. The event justified his views and hopes.
A battle was fought; the Carthaginians were routed, and upwards
of ten thousand of them slain, full three thousand of
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
whom were Carthaginian citizens, which filled their city with
mourning and the greatest consternation. Their camp was
taken, and with it immense riches, and a great number of
prisoners.
</p>

<p>
Timoleon, at the same time that he despatched the news of
this victory to Corinth, sent thither the finest arms found among
the plunder.<note place='foot'>Plut. p. 248-250.</note>
For he was desirous of having his city applauded
and admired by all men, when they should see that Corinth
alone, among all the Grecian cities, adorned its finest temples,
not with the spoils of Greece, and offerings dyed in the blood
of its citizens, the sight of which could tend only to preserve
the sad remembrance of their losses, but with those of barbarians,
which, by fine inscriptions, displayed at once the
courage and religious gratitude of those who had won them.
For these inscriptions imported, <q>That the Corinthians, and
Timoleon their general, after having freed the Greeks, settled
in Sicily, from the Carthaginian yoke, had hung up these arms
in their temples, as an eternal acknowledgment of the favour
and goodness of the gods.</q>
</p>

<p>
After this, Timoleon, leaving the mercenary troops in the
Carthaginian territories to waste and destroy them, returned to
Syracuse. On his arrival there, he banished the thousand
soldiers who had deserted him; and took no other revenge than
the commanding them to leave Syracuse before sun-set.
</p>

<p>
This victory gained by the Corinthians was followed by the
capture of a great many cities, which obliged the Carthaginians
to sue for peace.
</p>

<p>
In proportion as the appearance of success made the Carthaginians
vigorously exert themselves to raise powerful armies
both by land and sea, and prosperity led them to make an insolent
and cruel use of victory; so their courage would sink in
unforeseen adversities, their hopes of new resources vanish,
and their grovelling souls condescend to ask quarter of the
most inconsiderable enemy, and without sense of shame accept
the hardest and most mortifying conditions. Those now imposed
were, that they should possess only the lands lying beyond
the river Halycus;<note place='foot'>This river is not far
from Agrigentum. It is called Lycus, by Diodorus and Plutarch; but
this is thought a mistake.&mdash;Trans.</note> that they should give all the natives
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
free liberty to retire to Syracuse with their families and effects;
and that they should neither continue in the alliance, nor hold
any correspondence with the tyrants of that city.
</p>

<p>
About this time, in all probability, there happened at Carthage
a memorable incident, related by Justin.<note place='foot'>Justin,
l. xvi. c. 4.</note> Hanno, one of its
most powerful citizens, formed a design of seizing upon the
republic, by destroying the whole senate. He chose, for the
execution of this bloody plan, the day on which his daughter
was to be married, on which occasion he designed to invite the
senators to an entertainment, and there poison them all. The
conspiracy was discovered; but Hanno had such influence,
that the government did not dare to punish so execrable a
crime; the magistrates contented themselves with only preventing
it, by an order which forbade, in general, too great a
magnificence at weddings, and limited the expense on those
occasions. Hanno, seeing his stratagem defeated, resolved to
employ open force, and for that purpose armed all the slaves.
However, he was again discovered; and, to escape punishment,
retired, with twenty thousand armed slaves, to a castle that was
very strongly fortified, and there endeavoured, but without
success, to engage in his rebellion the Africans and the king of
Mauritania. He afterwards was taken prisoner, and carried to
Carthage; where, after being whipped, his eyes were put out,
his arms and thighs broken; he was put to death in presence
of the people, and his body, all torn with stripes, was hung on
a gibbet. His children and all his relations, though they had
not joined in his guilt, shared in his punishment. They were
all sentenced to die, in order that not a single person of his
family might be left, either to imitate his crime, or revenge his
death. Such was the temper of the Carthaginians; ever severe
and violent in their punishments, they carried them to the
extremes of rigour, and made them extend even to the innocent,
without showing the least regard to equity, moderation,
or gratitude.
</p>

<p>
I come now to the wars sustained by the Carthaginians, in
Africa itself as well as in Sicily, against Agathocles, which
exercised their arms during several years.<note place='foot'>Diod.
l. xix. p. 651-656-710-712-737-743-760. Justin, l. ii. c. 1-6.</note>
</p>

<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3685. A. Carth. 527. A. Rom. 429. Ant. J.C. 319.</note>
This Agathocles was a Sicilian, of obscure birth and low fortune.<note place='foot'>He
was, according to most historians, the son of a potter; but all allow him to
have worked at the trade. From the obscurity of his birth and condition, Polybius
raises an argument to prove his capacity and talents, in opposition to the slanders of
Timæus. But his greatest eulogium was the praise of Scipio. That illustrious Roman
being asked who, in his opinion, were the most prudent in the conduct of their
affairs, and most judiciously bold in the execution of their designs; answered,
Agathocles and Dionysius. Polyb. l. xv. p. 1003. edit. Gronov. However, let his
capacity have been ever so great, it was exceeded by his cruelties.&mdash;Trans.</note>
Supported at first by the forces of the Carthaginians,
he had invaded the sovereignty of Syracuse,
and made himself tyrant over it. In the infancy of his
power, the Carthaginians kept him within bounds; and
Hamilcar, their chief, forced him to agree to a treaty,
which restored tranquillity to Sicily. But he soon infringed the
articles of it, and declared war against the Carthaginians themselves;
who, under the conduct of Hamilcar, obtained a signal
victory over him,<note place='foot'>The battle was fought near the river
and city of Himera.&mdash;Trans.</note> and forced him to shut himself up in Syracuse.
The Carthaginians pursued him thither, and laid siege to that
important city, the capture of which would have given them
possession of all Sicily.
</p>

<p>
Agathocles, whose forces were greatly inferior to theirs, and
who moreover saw himself deserted by all his allies, from their
detestation of his horrid cruelties, meditated a design of so
daring, and, to all appearance, so impracticable a nature, that,
even after being happily carried into execution, it yet appears
almost incredible. This design was no less than to make Africa
the seat of war, and to besiege Carthage, at a time when he
could neither defend himself in Sicily, nor sustain the siege of
Syracuse. His profound secresy in the execution is as astonishing
as the design itself. He communicated his thoughts
on this affair to no person whatsoever, but contented himself
with declaring, that he had found out an infallible way to free
the Syracusans from the danger that surrounded them; that
they had only to endure with patience, for a short time, the
inconveniences of a siege; but that those who could not bring
themselves to this resolution, might freely depart the city.
Only sixteen hundred persons quitted it. He left his brother
Antander there, with forces and provisions sufficient for him
to make a stout defence. He set at liberty all slaves who were
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
of age to bear arms, and, after obliging them to take an oath,
joined them to his forces. He carried with him only fifty
talents,<note place='foot'>50,000 French crowns, or 11,250<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>
sterling.&mdash;Trans.</note>
to supply his present wants, well assured that he should
find in the enemy's country whatever was necessary to his
subsistence. He therefore set sail with two of his sons, Archagathus
and Heraclides, without letting any one person know
whither he intended to direct his course. All who were on
board his fleet believed that they were to be conducted either
to Italy or Sardinia, in order to plunder those countries, or to
lay waste those coasts of Sicily which belonged to the enemy.
The Carthaginians, surprised at so unexpected a departure,
endeavoured to prevent it; but Agathocles eluded their pursuit,
and made for the main ocean.
</p>

<p>
He did not discover his design till he had landed in Africa.
There, assembling his troops, he told them, in few words, the
motives which had prompted him to this expedition. He
represented, that the only way to free their country, was to
carry the war into the territories of their enemies: that he led
them who were enured to war, and of intrepid dispositions,
against a parcel of enemies who were softened and enervated
by ease and luxury: that the natives of the country, oppressed
with the yoke of a servitude equally cruel and ignominious,
would run in crowds to join them on the first news of their
arrival: that the boldness of their attempt would alone disconcert
the Carthaginians, who had no expectation of seeing an
enemy at their gates: in short, that no enterprise could possibly
be more advantageous or honourable than this; since
the whole wealth of Carthage would become the prey of the
victors, whose courage would be praised and admired by latest
posterity. The soldiers fancied themselves already masters of
Carthage, and received his speech with applauses and acclamations.
One circumstance alone gave them uneasiness, and
that was an eclipse of the sun, which happened just as they
were setting sail. In these ages, even the most civilized nations
understood very little the reason of these extraordinary
phenomena of nature; and used to draw from them (by their
soothsayers) superstitious and arbitrary conjectures, which
frequently would either suspend or hasten the more important
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
enterprises. However, Agathocles revived the drooping courage
of his soldiers, by assuring them that these eclipses
always foretold some instant change: that, therefore, good
fortune was taking its leave of Carthage, and coming over to
them.
</p>

<p>
Finding his soldiers in the good disposition he wished them,
he executed, almost at the same time, a second enterprise,
which was even more daring and hazardous than his first, of
carrying them over into Africa; and this was the burning every
ship in his fleet. Many reasons determined him to so desperate
an action. He had not one good harbour in Africa where
his ships could lie in safety. As the Carthaginians were masters
of the sea, they would not have failed to possess themselves
immediately of his fleet, which was incapable of making
the least resistance. In case he had left as many hands as
were necessary to defend it, he would have weakened his army,
(which was inconsiderable at the best,) and put it out of his
power to gain any advantage from this unexpected diversion,
the success of which depended entirely on the swiftness and
vigour of the execution. Lastly, he was desirous of putting
his soldiers under a necessity of conquering, by leaving them
no other refuge than victory. Much courage was necessary to
adopt such a resolution. He had already prepared all his
officers, who were entirely devoted to his service, and received
every impression he gave them. He then came suddenly into
the assembly with a crown upon his head, dressed in a magnificent
habit, and with the air and behaviour of a man who was
going to perform some religious ceremony, and addressing himself
to the assembly: <q>When we,</q> says he, <q>left Syracuse,
and were warmly pursued by the enemy; in this fatal necessity
I addressed myself to Ceres and Proserpine, the tutelar
divinities of Sicily; and promised, that if they would free us
from this imminent danger, I would burn all our ships in their
honour, at our first landing here. Aid me therefore, O soldiers,
to discharge my vow; for the goddesses can easily make
us amends for this sacrifice.</q> At the same time, taking a
flambeau in his hand, he hastily led the way on board his own
ship, and set it on fire. All the officers did the like, and were
cheerfully followed by the soldiers. The trumpets sounded
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
from every quarter, and the whole army echoed with joyful
shouts and acclamations. The fleet was soon consumed. The
soldiers had not been allowed time to reflect on the proposal
made to them. They all had been hurried on by a blind and
impetuous ardour; but when they had a little recovered their
reason, and, surveying in their minds the vast extent of ocean
which separated them from their own country, saw themselves
in that of the enemy without the least resource, or any means
of escaping out of it; a sad and melancholy silence succeeded
the transport of joy and acclamations, which, but a moment
before, had been so general in the army.
</p>

<p>
Here again Agathocles left no time for reflection. He
marched his army towards a place called the Great City, which
was part of the domain of Carthage. The country through
which they marched to this place, afforded the most delicious
and agreeable prospect in the world. On either side were
seen large meads, watered by beautiful streams, and covered
with innumerable flocks of all kinds of cattle; country seats
built with extraordinary magnificence; delightful avenues
planted with olive and all sorts of fruit trees; gardens of a
prodigious extent, and kept with a care and elegance which
delighted the eye. This prospect reanimated the soldiers.
They marched full of courage to the Great City, which they
took sword in hand, and enriched themselves with the plunder of
it, which was entirely abandoned to them. Tunis made as little
resistance; and this place was not far distant from Carthage.
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginians were in prodigious alarm when it was
known that the enemy was in the country, advancing by hasty
marches. This arrival of Agathocles made the Carthaginians
conclude, that their army before Syracuse had been defeated,
and their fleet lost. The people ran in disorder to the great
square of the city, whilst the senate assembled in haste and in
a tumultuous manner. Immediately they deliberated on the
means for preserving the city. They had no army in readiness
to oppose the enemy; and their imminent danger did not
permit them to wait the arrival of those forces which might
be raised in the country and among the allies. It was therefore
resolved, after several different opinions had been heard,
to arm the citizens. The number of the forces thus levied,
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
amounted to forty thousand foot, a thousand horse, and two
thousand armed chariots. Hanno and Bomilcar, though divided
betwixt themselves by some family quarrels, were
however joined in the command of these troops. They
marched immediately to meet the enemy; and, on sight of
them, drew up their forces in order of battle. Agathocles<note place='foot'>Agathocles
wanting arms for many of his soldiers, provided them with such as
were counterfeit, which looked well at a distance. And perceiving the discouragement
his forces were under on sight of the enemy's horse, he let fly a great many
owls, (privately procured for that purpose,) which his soldiers interpreted as an omen
and assurance of victory. Diod. l. xx. p. 754.&mdash;Trans.</note>
had, at most, but thirteen or fourteen thousand men. The
signal was given, and an obstinate fight ensued. Hanno, with
his sacred cohort, (the flower of the Carthaginian forces,) long
sustained the fury of the Greeks, and sometimes even broke
their ranks; but at last, overwhelmed with a shower of stones,
and covered with wounds, he fell dead on the field. Bomilcar
might have changed the face of things; but he had private
and personal reasons not to obtain a victory for his country.
He therefore thought proper to retire with the forces under
his command, and was followed by the whole army, which, by
that means, was forced to leave the field to Agathocles. After
pursuing the enemy some time, he returned, and plundered
the Carthaginian camp. Twenty thousand pair of manacles
were found in it, with which the Carthaginians had furnished
themselves, in the firm persuasion of their taking many prisoners.
The result of this victory was the capture of a great
number of strong-holds, and the defection of many of the
natives of the country, who joined the victor.
</p>

<p>
This descent of Agathocles into Africa, doubtless gave
birth to Scipio's design of making a like attempt upon the
same republic, and from the same place.<note place='foot'>Liv.
l. xxvii. n. 43.</note> Wherefore, in his
answer to Fabius, who ascribed to temerity his design of making
Africa the seat of the war, he forgot not to mention the
example of Agathocles, as an instance in favour of his enterprise;
and to show, that frequently there is no other way to
get rid of an enemy who presses too closely upon us, than by
carrying the war into his own country; and that men are
much more courageous when they act upon the offensive, than
when they stand only upon the defensive.
</p>

<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>

<p>
While the Carthaginians were thus warmly attacked by
their enemies, ambassadors arrived to them from Tyre.<note place='foot'>Diod.
l. xvii. p. 519. Quint. Curt. l. iv. c. 3.</note> They
came to implore their succour against Alexander the Great,
who was upon the point of taking their city, which he had long
besieged. The extremity to which their countrymen (for so
they called them) were reduced, touched the Carthaginians as
sensibly as their own danger. Though they were unable to
relieve, they at least thought it their duty to comfort them;
and deputed thirty of their principal citizens to express their
grief that they could not spare them any troops, because of the
present melancholy situation of their own affairs. The Tyrians,
though disappointed of the only hope they had left, did
not however despond; they committed their wives, children,<note place='foot'>Τῶν
τέκνων καὶ γυναικῶν μέρος, some of their wives and children. Diod.
l. xvii. p. 519.&mdash;Trans.</note>
and old men, to the care of these deputies; and thus, being
delivered from all inquietude, with regard to persons who were
dearer to them than any thing in the world, they thought alone
of making a resolute defence, prepared for the worst that might
happen. Carthage received this afflicted company with all
possible marks of amity, and paid to guests who were so dear
and worthy of compassion, all the services which they could
have expected from the most affectionate and tender parents.
</p>

<p>
Quintus Curtius places this embassy from Tyre to the Carthaginians
at the same time that the Syracusans were ravaging
Africa, and had advanced to the very gates of Carthage. But
the expedition of Agathocles against Africa cannot agree in
time with the siege of Tyre, which was more than twenty years
before it.
</p>

<p>
At the same time, Carthage was solicitous how to extricate
itself from the difficulties with which it was surrounded. The
present unhappy state of the republic was considered as the
effect of the wrath of the gods: and it was acknowledged to be
justly deserved, particularly with regard to two deities, towards
whom the Carthaginians had been remiss in the discharge of
certain duties prescribed by their religion, and which had once
been observed with great exactness. It was a custom (coeval
with the city itself) at Carthage, to send annually to Tyre (the
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
mother city) the tenth of all the revenues of the republic, as an
offering to Hercules, the patron and protector of both cities.
The domain, and consequently the revenues of Carthage, having
increased considerably, the portion, on the contrary, of the
god, had been lessened; and they were far from remitting the
whole tenth to him. They were seized with a scruple on this
point: they made an open and public confession of their insincerity
and sacrilegious avarice; and, to expiate their guilt, they
sent to Tyre a great number of presents, and small shrines
of their deities all of gold, which amounted to a prodigious
value.
</p>

<p>
Another violation of religion, which to their inhuman superstition
seemed as flagrant as the former, gave them no less
uneasiness. Anciently, children of the best families in Carthage
used to be sacrificed to Saturn. They now reproached
themselves with having failed to pay to the god the honours
which they thought were due to him; and with having used
fraud and dishonest dealing towards him, by having substituted,
in their sacrifices, children of slaves or beggars, bought for
that purpose, in the room of those nobly born. To expiate
the guilt of so horrid an impiety, a sacrifice was made to this
blood-thirsty god, of two hundred children of the first rank;
and upwards of three hundred persons, through a sense of this
terrible neglect, offered themselves voluntarily as victims, to
pacify, by the effusion of their blood, the wrath of the gods.
</p>

<p>
After these expiations, expresses were despatched to Hamilcar
in Sicily, with the news of what had happened in Africa,
and, at the same time, to request immediate succours. He
commanded the deputies to observe the strictest silence on the
subject of the victory of Agathocles; and spread a contrary
report, that he had been entirely defeated, his forces all cut off,
and his whole fleet taken by the Carthaginians; and, in confirmation
of this report, he showed the irons of the vessels pretended
to be taken, which had been carefully sent to him. The
truth of this report was not at all doubted in Syracuse; the
majority were for capitulating;<note place='foot'>And the most
forward of all the rest was Antander, the brother of Agathocles,
left commander in his absence; who was so terrified with the report, that he was
eager for having the city surrendered; and expelled out of it eight thousand inhabitants
who were of a contrary opinion.&mdash;Trans.</note> when a galley of thirty oars,
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
built in haste by Agathocles, arrived in the port; and through
great difficulties and dangers forced its way to the besieged.
The news of Agathocles's victory immediately flew through the
city, and restored alacrity and resolution to the inhabitants.
Hamilcar made a last effort to storm the city, but was beaten
off with loss. He then raised the siege, and sent five thousand
men to the relief of his distressed country. Some time after,<note place='foot'>Diod.
p. 767-769.</note> having resumed the siege, and hoping to surprise the Syracusans
by attacking them in the night, his design was discovered;
and falling alive into the enemy's hands, he was put to death
with the most exquisite tortures.<note place='foot'>He was cruelly
tortured till he died, and so met with the fate which his fellow-citizens,
offended at his conduct in Sicily, had probably allotted for him at home.
He was too formidable to be attacked at the head of his army; and therefore the
votes of the senate (whatever they were) being, according to custom, cast into a
vessel, it was immediately closed, with an order not to uncover it, till he was returned,
and had thrown up his commission. Justin, l. xxii. c. 3.&mdash;Trans.</note>
Hamilcar's head was sent
immediately to Agathocles, who, advancing to the enemy's
camp, threw it into a general consternation, by displaying to
them the head of this general, which manifested the melancholy
situation of their affairs in Sicily.
</p>

<p>
To these foreign enemies was joined a domestic one,
which was more to be feared, as being more dangerous than
the others;<note place='foot'>Diod. p. 779-781. Justin, l.
xxii. c. 7.</note> this was Bomilcar their general, who was then in
possession of the first post in Carthage. He had long meditated
the establishment of himself as tyrant at Carthage, and
attaining the sovereign authority there; and imagined that the
present troubles offered him the wished-for opportunity. He
therefore entered the city, and being seconded by a small number
of citizens, who were the accomplices of his rebellion, and
a body of foreign soldiers, he proclaimed himself tyrant; and
showed himself literally such, by cutting the throats of all the
citizens whom he met with in the streets. A tumult arising
immediately in the city, it was at first thought that the enemy
had taken it by some treachery; but when it was known that
Bomilcar caused all this disturbance, the young men took up
arms to repel the tyrant, and from the tops of the houses discharged
whole volleys of darts and stones upon the heads of
his soldiers. When he saw an army marching in order against
him, he retired with his troops to an eminence, with design to
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
make a vigorous defence, and to sell his life as dear as possible.
To spare the blood of the citizens, a general pardon was
proclaimed for all without exception who would lay down their
arms. They surrendered upon this proclamation, and all enjoyed
the benefit of it, Bomilcar their chief excepted: for the
Carthaginians, without regarding their oath, condemned him
to death, and fastened him to a cross, where he suffered the
most exquisite torments. From the cross, as from a rostrum,
he harangued the people; and thought himself justly entitled
to reproach them for their injustice, their ingratitude, and perfidy,
which he did by enumerating many illustrious generals,
whose services they had rewarded with an ignominious death.
He expired on the cross whilst uttering these reproaches.<note place='foot'>It
would seem incredible that any man could so far triumph over the pains of
the cross, as to talk with any coherence in his discourse; had not Seneca assured us,
that some have so far despised and insulted its tortures, that they spit contemptuously
upon the spectators. Quidam ex patibulo suos spectatores conspuerunt.
<hi rend='italic'>De vitâ beatâ</hi>, c. 19.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
Agathocles had won over to his interest a powerful king of
Cyrene,<note place='foot'>Diod. p. 777-779-791-802. Justin,
l. xxii. c. 7, 8</note> named Ophellas, whose ambition he had flattered
with the most splendid hopes, by leading him to understand,
that, contenting himself with Sicily, he would leave to Ophellas
the empire of Africa. But, as Agathocles did not scruple
to commit the most horrid crimes when he thought them conducive
to his interest, the credulous prince had no sooner put
himself and his army in his power, than, by the blackest perfidy,
he caused him to be murdered, in order that Ophellas's
army might be entirely at his devotion. Many nations were
now joined in alliance with Agathocles, and several strongholds
were garrisoned by his forces. As he now saw the
affairs of Africa in a flourishing condition, he thought it proper
to look after those of Sicily; accordingly he sailed back thither,
having left the command of the army to his son Archagathus.
His renown, and the report of his victories, flew before him.
On the news of his arrival in Sicily many towns revolted to
him; but bad news soon recalled him to Africa. His absence
had quite changed the face of things; and all his endeavours
were incapable of restoring them to their former condition.
All his strong-holds had surrendered to the enemy; the Africans
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
had deserted him; some of his troops were lost, and the
remainder were unable to make head against the Carthaginians;
he had no way to transport them into Sicily, as he was
destitute of ships, and the enemy were masters at sea: he could
not hope for either peace or treaty with the barbarians, since
he had insulted them in so outrageous a manner, by his being
the first who had dared to make a descent in their country.
In this extremity, he thought only of providing for his own
safety. After many adventures, this base deserter of his army,
and perfidious betrayer of his own children, who were left by
him to the wild fury of his disappointed soldiers, stole away
from the dangers which threatened him, and arrived at Syracuse
with very few followers. His soldiers, seeing themselves
thus betrayed, murdered his sons, and surrendered to the enemy.
Himself died miserably soon after, and ended, by a cruel
death,<note place='foot'>He was poisoned by one Mænon, whom
he had unnaturally abused. His teeth were putrified by the
violence of the poison, and his body tortured all over with the
most racking pains. Mænon was excited to this deed by Archagathus, grandson of
Agathocles, whom he designed to defeat of the succession, in favour of his other son
Agathocles. Before his death, he restored the democracy to the people. It is observable,
that Justin (or rather Trogus) and Diodorus disagree in all the material
part of this tyrant's history.&mdash;Trans.</note> a life that had
been polluted with the blackest crimes.
</p>

<p>
In this period may be placed another incident related by
Justin.<note place='foot'>Justin, l. xxi. c. 6.</note>
The fame of Alexander's conquests made the Carthaginians
fear, that he might think of turning his arms towards
Africa. The disastrous fate of Tyre, whence they drew their
origin, and which he had so lately destroyed; the building of
Alexandria upon the confines of Africa and Egypt, as if he intended
it as a rival city to Carthage; the uninterrupted successes
of that prince, whose ambition and good fortune were
boundless; all this justly alarmed the Carthaginians. To
sound his inclinations, Hamilcar, surnamed Rhodanus, pretending
to have been driven from his country by the cabals of
his enemies, went over to the camp of Alexander, to whom he
was introduced by Parmenio, and offered him his services.
The king received him graciously, and had several conferences
with him. Hamilcar did not fail to transmit to his country
whatever discoveries he made from time to time of Alexander's
designs. Nevertheless, on his return to Carthage, after Alexander's
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
death, he was considered as a betrayer of his country
to that prince; and accordingly was put to death, by a sentence
which displayed equally the ingratitude and cruelty of his
countrymen.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3727. A. Carth. 569. A. Rom. 471. Ant. J.C. 277.</note>
I am now to speak of the wars of the Carthaginians in Sicily,
in the time of Pyrrhus, king of Epirus.<note place='foot'>Polyb. l.
iii. p. 250. edit. Gronov.</note> The Romans,
to whom the designs of that ambitious prince were
not unknown, in order to strengthen themselves
against any attempts he might make upon Italy, had
renewed their treaties with the Carthaginians, who,
on their side, were no less afraid of his crossing into Sicily.
To the articles of the preceding treaties, there was added an
engagement of mutual assistance, in case either of the contracting
powers should be attacked by Pyrrhus.
</p>

<p>
The foresight of the Romans was well founded: Pyrrhus
turned his arms against Italy, and gained many victories.<note place='foot'>Justin,
l. xviii. c. 2.</note> The
Carthaginians, in consequence of the last treaty, thought themselves
obliged to assist the Romans; and accordingly sent
them a fleet of six-score sail, under the command of Mago.
This general, in an audience before the senate, signified to
them the interest which his superiors took in the war which
they heard was carrying on against the Romans, and offered
them their assistance. The senate returned thanks for the
obliging offer of the Carthaginians, but at present thought fit
to decline it.
</p>

<p>
Mago,<note place='foot'>Idem.</note> some days after, repaired to Pyrrhus, upon pretence
of offering the mediation of Carthage for terminating his quarrel
with the Romans; but in reality to sound him, and discover,
if possible, his designs with regard to Sicily, which common
fame reported he was going to invade. The Carthaginians
were afraid that either Pyrrhus or the Romans would interfere
in the affairs of that island, and transport forces thither for the
conquest of it. And, indeed, the Syracusans, who had been
besieged for some time by the Carthaginians, had sent pressingly
for succour to Pyrrhus. This prince had a particular
reason to espouse their interests, having married Lanassa,
daughter of Agathocles, by whom he had a son named Alexander.
He at last sailed from Tarentum, passed the Strait,
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
and arrived in Sicily. His conquests at first were so rapid,
that he left the Carthaginians, in the whole island, only the
single town of Lilybæum. He laid siege to it, but meeting
with a vigorous resistance, was obliged to raise the siege; not
to mention that the urgent necessity of his affairs called him
back to Italy, where his presence was absolutely necessary.
Nor was it less so in Sicily, which, on his departure, returned
to the obedience of its former masters. Thus he lost this
island with the same rapidity that he had won it. As he was
embarking, he turned his eyes back to Sicily, and exclaimed to
those about him,<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>in
Pyrrh.</hi> p. 398.</note> <q>What a fine field of battle<note place='foot'>Οἵαν
ἀπολείπομεν, ὦ φίλοι, Καρχηδονίοις καὶ Ῥωμαίοις παλαίστραν.
The Greek expression is beautiful. Indeed Sicily was a kind of Palæstra, where the
Carthaginians and Romans exercised themselves in war, and for many years seemed to play
the part of wrestlers with each other. The English language, as well as the French,
has no word to express the Greek term.&mdash;Trans.</note> do we leave
the Carthaginians and Romans!</q> His prediction was soon
verified.
</p>

<p>
After his departure, the chief magistracy of Syracuse was
conferred on Hiero, who afterwards obtained the name and
dignity of king, by the united suffrages of the citizens; so
greatly had his government pleased. He was appointed to
carry on the war against the Carthaginians, and obtained several
advantages over them. But now a common interest reunited
them against a new enemy, who began to appear in
Sicily, and justly alarmed both: these were the Romans, who,
having crushed all the enemies which had hitherto exercised
their arms in Italy itself, were now powerful enough to carry
them out of it; and to lay the foundation of that vast power
there to which they afterwards attained, and of which it was
probable they had even then formed the design. Sicily lay too
commodious for them, not to form a resolution of establishing
themselves in it. They therefore eagerly snatched this opportunity
for crossing into it, which caused the rupture between
them and the Carthaginians, and gave rise to the first Punic
war. This I shall treat of more at large, by relating the causes
of that war.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>

<div>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter II. The History of Carthage.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter II. The History of Carthage.'/>
<head>Chapter II. The History of Carthage from the first Punic War
to its destruction.</head>

<p>
The plan which I have laid down does not allow me to enter
into an exact detail of the wars between Rome and Carthage;
since that pertains rather to the Roman history, which I do not
intend to touch upon, except transiently and occasionally. I
shall therefore relate such facts only as may give the reader a
just idea of the republic whose history lies before me; by confining
myself to those particulars which relate chiefly to the
Carthaginians, and to their most important transactions in Sicily,
Spain, and Africa: a subject in itself sufficiently extensive.
</p>

<p>
I have already observed, that from the first Punic war to the
ruin of Carthage, a hundred and eighteen years elapsed. This
whole time may be divided into five parts or intervals.
</p>

<p>
I. The first Punic war lasted twenty-four years.
</p>

<p>
II. The interval betwixt the first and second Punic war is
also twenty-four years.
</p>

<p>
III. The second Punic war took up seventeen years.
</p>

<p>
IV. The interval between the second and third is forty-nine
years.
</p>

<p>
V. The third Punic war, terminated by the destruction of
Carthage, continued but four years and some months.
</p>

<p>
Total: 118 years.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3724. A. Carth. 566. A. Rom. 468. Ant. J.C. 280.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Article I. The first Punic War.</hi>&mdash;The first Punic war
arose from the following cause. Some Campanian
soldiers, in the service of Agathocles, the Sicilian
tyrant, having entered as friends into Messina, soon
after murdered part of the townsmen, drove out the
rest, married their wives, seized their effects, and remained
sole masters of that important city.<note place='foot'>Polyb.
l. i. p. 8. edit Gronov.</note> They then assumed
the name of Mamertines. In imitation of them, and by their
assistance, a Roman legion treated in the same cruel manner
the city of Rhegium, lying directly opposite to Messina, on the
other side of the strait. These two perfidious cities, supporting
one another, rendered themselves at length formidable to their
neighbours; and especially Messina, which became very powerful,
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
and gave great umbrage and uneasiness both to the Syracusans
and Carthaginians, who possessed one part of Sicily.
As soon as the Romans had got rid of the enemies they had
so long contended with, and particularly of Pyrrhus, they
began to think of punishing the crime of their citizens, who
had settled themselves at Rhegium, in so cruel and treacherous
a manner, nearly ten years before. Accordingly, they took
the city, and killed, in the attack, the greatest part of the inhabitants,
who, instigated by despair, had fought to the last
gasp: three hundred only were left, who were carried to Rome,
whipped, and then publicly beheaded in the forum. The view
which the Romans had in making this bloody execution, was,
to prove to their allies their own sincerity and innocence.
Rhegium was immediately restored to its lawful possessors.
The Mamertines, who were considerably weakened, as well by
the ruin of their confederate city, as by the losses which they
had sustained from the Syracusans, who had lately placed
Hiero at their head, thought it time to provide for their own
safety. But divisions arising among them, one part surrendered
the citadel to the Carthaginians, whilst the other called
in the Romans to their assistance, and resolved to put them in
possession of their city.
</p>

<p>
The affair was debated in the Roman senate, where, being
considered in all its lights, it appeared to have some
difficulties.<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. i. p. 12-15. edit. Gronov.</note>
On one hand, it was thought base, and altogether unworthy of
the Roman virtue, for them to undertake openly the defence of
traitors, whose perfidy was exactly the same with that of the
Rhegians, whom the Romans had recently punished with so
exemplary a severity. On the other hand, it was of the utmost
consequence to stop the progress of the Carthaginians, who,
not satisfied with their conquests in Africa and Spain, had also
made themselves masters of almost all the islands of the Sardinian
and Hetrurian seas; and would certainly get all Sicily
into their hands, if they should be suffered to possess themselves
of Messina. From thence into Italy, the passage was
very short; and it was in some manner to invite an enemy to
come over, to leave the entrance open. These reasons, though
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
so strong, could not prevail with the senate to declare
in favour of the Mamertines; and accordingly, motives
of honour and justice prevailed in this instance over
those of interest and policy.
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3741. A. Carth. 583. A. Rom. 485. Ant. J.C. 263.</note>
But the people were not so scrupulous; for, in an assembly held on this
subject, it was resolved that the Mamertines should be
assisted.<note place='foot'>Frontin.</note>
The consul Appius Claudius immediately set forward with his
army, and boldly crossed the strait, after he had, by an ingenious
stratagem, eluded the vigilance of the Carthaginian
general. The Carthaginians, partly by art and partly by force,
were driven out of the citadel; and the city was surrendered
immediately to the consul. The Carthaginians hanged their
general, for having given up the citadel in so cowardly a manner,
and prepared to besiege the town with all their forces.
Hiero joined them with his own. But the consul, having
defeated them separately, raised the siege, and laid waste at
pleasure the neighbouring country, the enemy not daring to
face him. This was the first expedition which the Romans
made out of Italy.
</p>

<p>
It is doubted<note place='foot'>The Chevalier Folard
examines this question in his remarks upon Polybius,
l. i. p. 16.&mdash;Trans.</note> whether the motives which prompted the
Romans to undertake this expedition, were very upright, and
exactly conformable to the rules of strict justice. Be this as
it may, their passage into Sicily, and the succour they gave to
the inhabitants of Messina, may be said to have been the first
step by which they ascended to that height of glory and grandeur
which they afterwards attained.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3743. A. Rom. 487.</note>
Hiero, having reconciled himself to the Romans, and
entered into an alliance with them, the Carthaginians bent all
their thoughts on Sicily, and sent numerous armies
thither.<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. i. p. 15-19.</note>
Agrigentum was their place of arms; which,
being attacked by the Romans, was won by them,
after they had besieged it seven months, and gained one battle.
</p>

<p>
Notwithstanding the advantage of this victory, and the
conquest of so important a city, the Romans were sensible,
that whilst the Carthaginians should continue masters at sea,
the maritime places in the island would always side with them,
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
and put it out of their power ever to drive them out of
Sicily.<note place='foot'>Id. p. 20.</note>
Besides, they saw with reluctance Africa enjoy a profound
tranquillity, at a time that Italy was infested by the frequent
incursions of its enemies. They now first formed the design
of having a fleet, and of disputing the empire of the sea with
the Carthaginians. The undertaking was bold, and in outward
appearance rash; but it evinces the courage and magnanimity
of the Romans. They were not at that time possessed of a
single vessel which they could call their own; and the ships
which had transported their forces into Sicily had been borrowed
of their neighbours. They were unexperienced in sea
affairs, had no carpenters acquainted with the building of ships,
and did not know even the shape of the Quinqueremes, or
galleys with five benches of oars, in which the chief strength
of fleets at that time consisted. But happily, the year before,
one had been taken upon the coasts of Italy, which served
them as a model. They therefore applied themselves with
incredible industry and ardour to the building of ships in the
same form; and in the mean time they got together a set of
rowers, who were taught an exercise and discipline utterly
unknown to them before, in the following manner. Benches
were made, on the shore, in the same order and fashion with
those of galleys. The rowers were seated on these benches,
and taught, as if they had been furnished with oars, to throw
themselves backwards with their arms drawn to their breasts;
and then to throw their bodies and arms forward in one regular
motion, the instant their commanding officer gave the signal.
In two months, one hundred galleys of five benches of oars,
and twenty of three benches, were built; and after some time
had been spent in exercising the rowers on shipboard, the fleet
put to sea, and went in quest of the enemy. The consul
Duillius had the command of it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3745. A. Rom. 489.</note>
The Romans coming up with the Carthaginians near the
coast of Myle, they prepared for an engagement.<note place='foot'>Polyb.
l. i. p. 22.</note> As the Roman galleys, by their being clumsily and
hastily built, were neither very nimble nor easy to
work; this inconvenience was supplied by a machine invented
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
for this occasion, and afterwards known by the name of the
Corvus,<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. i. p. 22.</note>
(<hi rend='italic'>Crow</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>Crane</hi>,)
by the help of which they grappled
the enemy's ships, boarded them, and immediately came
to close engagement. The signal for fighting was given. The
Carthaginian fleet consisted of a hundred and thirty sail, under
the command of Hannibal.<note place='foot'>A different person
from the great Hannibal.&mdash;Trans.</note> He himself was on board a
galley of seven benches of oars, which had once belonged to
Pyrrhus. The Carthaginians, thoroughly despising enemies
who were utterly unacquainted with sea affairs, imagined that
their very appearance would put them to flight, and therefore
came forward boldly, with little expectation of fighting; but
firmly imagining they should reap the spoils, which they had
already devoured with their eyes. They were nevertheless a
little surprised at the sight of the above-mentioned engines,
raised on the prow of every one of the enemy's ships, and
which were entirely new to them. But their astonishment
increased, when they saw these engines drop down at once;
and being thrown forcibly into their vessels, grapple them in
spite of all resistance. This changed the form of the engagement,
and obliged the Carthaginians to come to close engagement
with their enemies, as though they had fought them on
land. They were unable to sustain the attack of the Romans:
a horrible slaughter ensued, and the Carthaginians lost fourscore
vessels, among which was the admiral's galley, he himself
escaping with difficulty in a small boat.
</p>

<p>
So considerable and unexpected a victory raised the courage
of the Romans, and seemed to redouble their vigour for the
continuance of the war. Extraordinary honours were bestowed
on the consul Duillius, who was the first Roman that had a
naval triumph decreed him. A rostral pillar was erected in
his honour, with a noble inscription; which pillar is yet standing
in Rome.<note place='foot'>These pillars were called <hi rend='italic'>Rostratæ</hi>,
from the beaks of ships with which they
were adorned; <hi rend='italic'>Rostra</hi>.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
During the two following years, the Romans grew still
stronger at sea, by their success in several engagements.<note place='foot'>Polyb.
l. i. p. 24.</note> But these were considered by them only as essays preparatory to
the great design they meditated of carrying the war into Africa,
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
and of combating the Carthaginians in their own country.
There was nothing the latter dreaded more; and to divert so
dangerous a blow, they resolved to fight the enemy, whatever
might be the consequence.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3749. A. Rom. 493.</note>
The Romans had elected M. Atilius Regulus, and L. Manlius,
consuls for this year.<note place='foot'>Polyb l. i.
p. 25.</note> Their fleet consisted of
three hundred and thirty vessels, on board of which
were one hundred and forty thousand men, each
vessel having three hundred rowers, and a hundred and twenty
soldiers. That of the Carthaginians, commanded by Hanno
and Hamilcar, had twenty vessels more than the Romans, and
a greater number of men in proportion. The two fleets came
in sight of each other near Ecnomus in Sicily. No man could
behold two such formidable navies, or be a spectator of the
extraordinary preparations they made for fighting, without
being under some concern, on seeing the danger which menaced
two of the most powerful states in the world. As the
courage on both sides was equal, and no great disparity in the
forces, the fight was obstinate, and the victory long doubtful;
but at last the Carthaginians were overcome. More than sixty
of their ships were taken by the enemy, and thirty sunk. The
Romans lost twenty-four, not one of which fell into the enemy's
hands.
</p>

<p>
The fruit of this victory, as the Romans had designed it,
was their sailing to Africa, after having refitted their ships, and
provided them with all necessaries for carrying on a long war
in a foreign country.<note place='foot'>Id. p. 30.</note>
They landed happily in Africa, and began
the war by taking a town called Clypea, which had a commodious
haven. From thence, after having sent an express to
Rome, to give advice of their landing, and to receive orders
from the senate, they overran the open country, in which they
made terrible havoc; bringing away whole flocks of cattle, and
twenty thousand prisoners.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3750. A. Rom. 494.</note>
The express returned in the mean time with the orders of
the senate, who decreed, that Regulus should continue
to command the armies in Africa, with the
title of Proconsul; and that his colleague should
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
return with a great part of the fleet and the forces; leaving
Regulus only forty vessels, fifteen thousand foot, and five
hundred horse. Their leaving the latter with so few ships and
troops, was a visible renunciation of the advantages which
might have been expected from this descent upon Africa.
</p>

<p>
The people at Rome depended greatly on the courage and
abilities of Regulus; and the joy was universal, when it was
known that he was continued in the command in Africa; he
alone was afflicted on that account.<note place='foot'>Val.
Max. l. iv. c. 4.</note> When news was brought
him of it, he wrote to Rome, and desired, in the strongest
terms, that he might be appointed a successor. His chief
reason was, that the death of the farmer who rented his
grounds, having given one of his hirelings an opportunity of
carrying off all the implements of tillage, his presence was
necessary for taking care of his little spot of ground, (but seven
acres,) which was all his family subsisted upon. But the
senate undertook to have his lands cultivated at the public
expense; to maintain his wife and children; and to indemnify
him for the loss he had sustained by the robbery of his hireling.
Thrice happy age! in which poverty was thus had in
honour, and was united with the most rare and uncommon
merit, and the highest employments of the state! Regulus
thus freed from his domestic cares, bent his whole thoughts on
discharging the duty of a general.
</p>

<p>
After taking several castles, he laid siege to Adis one of
the strongest fortresses of the country.<note place='foot'>Polyb.
l. i. p. 31-36.</note> The Carthaginians,
exasperated at seeing their enemies thus laying waste their
lands at pleasure, at last took the field, and marched
against them, to force them to raise the siege. With this
view, they posted themselves on a hill, which overlooked the
Roman camp, and was convenient for annoying the enemy;
but, at the same time, by its situation, rendered one part of
their army useless. For the strength of the Carthaginians lay
chiefly in their horses and elephants, which are of no service
but in plains. Regulus did not give them an opportunity of
descending from the hill; but, in order to take advantage of
this essential mistake of the Carthaginian generals, fell upon
them in this post; and after meeting with a feeble resistance,
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
put the enemy to flight, plundered their camp, and laid waste
the adjacent country. Then, having taken Tunis,<note place='foot'>In the interval
betwixt the departure of Manlius and the taking of Tunis, we
are to place the memorable combat of Regulus and his whole army, with a serpent
of so prodigious a size, that the fabulous one of Cadmus is hardly comparable to it.
The story of this serpent was elegantly written by Livy, but it is now lost. Valerius
Maximus, however, partly repairs that loss; and in the last chapter of his first book,
gives us this account of this monster from Livy himself.&mdash;He [Livy] says, that on the
banks of Bragada (an African river) lay a serpent of so enormous a size, that it
kept the whole Roman army from coming to the river. Several soldiers had been
buried in the wide caverns of its belly, and many pressed to death in the spiral
volumes of its tail. Its skin was impenetrable to darts: and it was with repeated
endeavours that stones, slung from the military engines, at last killed it. The serpent
then exhibited a sight that was more terrible to the Roman cohorts and legions
than even Carthage itself. The streams of the river were dyed with its blood, and
the stench of its putrified carcass infected the adjacent country, so that the Roman
army was forced to decamp. Its skin, one hundred and twenty feet long, was sent
to Rome: and, if Pliny may be credited, was to be seen (together with the jaw-bone
of the same monster, in the temple where they were first deposited,) as late as the
Numantine war.&mdash;Trans.</note> an important
city, and which brought him near Carthage, he made his
army encamp there.
</p>

<p>
The enemy were in the utmost alarm. All things had succeeded
ill with them, their forces had been defeated by sea and
land, and upwards of two hundred towns had surrendered to
the conqueror. Besides, the Numidians made greater havoc
in their territories than even the Romans. They expected
every moment to see their capital besieged. And their affliction
was increased by the concourse of peasants with their wives
and children, who flocked from all parts to Carthage for safety:
which gave them melancholy apprehensions of a famine in
case of a siege. Regulus, afraid of having the glory of his
victories torn from him by a successor, made some proposal of
an accommodation to the vanquished enemy; but the conditions
appeared so hard, that they could not listen to them. As
he did not doubt his being soon master of Carthage, he would
not abate any thing in his demands; but, by an infatuation
which is almost inseparable from great and unexpected success,
he treated them with haughtiness; and pretended, that
every thing he suffered them to possess, ought to be esteemed
a favour; adding this farther insult, <q>That they ought either
to overcome like brave men, or learn to submit to the victor.</q><note place='foot'>Δεῖ
τοὺς ἀγαθοὺς ἤ νικᾷν, ἤ εἴκειν τοῖς ὑπερέχουσιν. Diod.
<hi rend='italic'>Eclog.</hi> l. xxiii. c. 10.&mdash;Trans.</note>
So harsh and disdainful a treatment only fired their resentment;
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
and they resolved rather to die sword in hand, than to do any
thing which might derogate from the dignity of Carthage.
</p>

<p>
Reduced to this fatal extremity, they received, in the happiest
juncture, a reinforcement of auxiliary troops out of Greece,
with Xanthippus the Lacedæmonian at their head, who had
been educated in the discipline of Sparta, and learnt the art of
war in that renowned and excellent school. When he had
heard the circumstances of the last battle, which were told him
at his request; had clearly discerned the occasion of its being
lost; and perfectly informed himself in what the strength of
Carthage consisted; he declared publicly, and repeated it often,
in the hearing of the rest of the officers, that the misfortunes
of the Carthaginians were owing entirely to the incapacity of
their generals. These discourses came at last to the ear of the
public council; the members of it were struck with them, and
they requested him to attend them. He enforced his opinion
with such strong and convincing reasons, that the oversights
committed by the generals were visible to every one; and he
proved as clearly, that, by a conduct opposite to the former,
they would not only secure their dominions, but drive the
enemy out of them. This speech revived the courage and
hopes of the Carthaginians; and Xanthippus was entreated,
and, in some measure, forced, to accept the command of the
army. When the Carthaginians saw, in his exercising of their
forces near the city, the manner in which he drew them up in
order of battle, made them advance or retreat on the first signal,
file off with order and expedition; in a word, perform all
the evolutions and movements of the military art; they were
struck with astonishment, and owned, that the ablest generals
which Carthage had hitherto produced, knew nothing in
comparison of Xanthippus.
</p>

<p>
The officers, soldiers, and every one, were lost in admiration;
and, what is very uncommon, jealousy gave no alloy to it; the
fear of the present danger, and the love of their country,
stifling, without doubt, all other sentiments. The gloomy consternation,
which had before seized the whole army, was succeeded
by joy and alacrity. The soldiers were urgent to be
led against the enemy, in the firm assurance (as they said) of
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
being victorious under their new leader, and of obliterating the
disgrace of former defeats. Xanthippus did not suffer their
ardour to cool; and the sight of the enemy only inflamed it.
When he had approached within little more than twelve hundred
paces of them, he thought proper to call a council of war,
in order to show respect to the Carthaginian generals, by consulting
them. All unanimously deferred to his opinion; upon
which it was resolved to give the enemy battle the following
day.
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginian army was composed of twelve thousand
foot, four thousand horse, and about a hundred elephants.
That of the Romans, as near as may be guessed from what
goes before, (for Polybius does not mention their numbers
here,) consisted of fifteen thousand foot and three hundred
horse.
</p>

<p>
It must be a noble sight to see two armies like these before
us, not overcharged with numbers, but composed of brave soldiers,
and commanded by very able generals, engaged in battle.
In those tumultuous fights, where two or three hundred thousand
are engaged on both sides, confusion is inevitable; and it
is difficult, amidst a thousand events, where chance generally
seems to have a greater share than counsel, to discover the
true merit of commanders, and the real causes of victory. But
in such engagements as this before us, nothing escapes the
curiosity of the reader; for he clearly sees the disposition of
the two armies; imagines he almost hears the orders given out
by the generals; follows all the movements of the army; can
point out the faults committed on both sides; and is thereby
qualified to determine, with certainty, the causes to which the
victory or defeat is owing. The success of this battle, however
inconsiderable it may appear from the small number of the
combatants, was nevertheless to decide the fate of Carthage.
</p>

<p>
The disposition of both armies was as follows. Xanthippus
drew up all his elephants in front. Behind these, at some distance,
he placed the Carthaginian infantry in one body or
phalanx. The foreign troops in the Carthaginian service were
posted, one part of them on the right, between the phalanx and
the horse; and the other, composed of light-armed soldiers, in
platoons, at the head of the two wings of the cavalry.
</p>

<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>

<p>
On the side of the Romans, as they apprehended the elephants
most, Regulus, to provide against them, posted his light-armed
soldiers, on a line, in the front of the legions. In the
rear of these, he placed the cohorts one behind another, and
the horse on the wings. In thus straitening the front of his
main battle, to give it more depth, he indeed took a just precaution,
says Polybius, against the elephants; but he did not
provide for the inequality of his cavalry, which was much inferior
in numbers to that of the enemy.
</p>

<p>
The two armies being thus drawn up, waited only for the
signal. Xanthippus orders the elephants to advance, to break
the ranks of the enemy; and commands the two wings of the
cavalry to charge the Romans in flank. At the same time, the
latter, clashing their arms, and shouting after the manner of
their country, advance against the enemy. Their cavalry did
not stand the onset long, being so much inferior to that of the
Carthaginians. The infantry in the left wing, to avoid the
attack of the elephants, and show how little they feared the
mercenaries who formed the enemies' right wing, attacks it,
puts it to flight, and pursues it to the camp. Those in the
first ranks, who were opposed to the elephants, were broken
and trodden under foot, after fighting valiantly; and the rest
of the main body stood firm for some time, by reason of its
great depth. But when the rear, being attacked by the enemy's
cavalry, was obliged to face about and receive it; and those
who had broken through the elephants, met the phalanx of the
Carthaginians, which had not yet engaged, and which received
them in good order, the Romans were routed on all sides, and
entirely defeated. The greatest part of them were crushed to
death by the enormous weight of the elephants: and the
remainder, standing in the ranks, were shot through and
through with arrows from the enemy's horse. Only a small
number fled; and as they were in an open country, the horse
and elephants killed a great part of them. Five hundred, or
thereabouts, who went off with Regulus, were taken prisoners
with him. The Carthaginians lost in this battle eight hundred
mercenaries, who were opposed to the left wing of the Romans;
and of the latter only two thousand escaped, who, by their
pursuing the enemy's right wing, had drawn themselves out of
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
the engagement. All the rest, Regulus and those taken with
him excepted, were left dead in the field. The two thousand,
who had escaped the slaughter, retired to Clypea, and were
saved in an almost miraculous manner.
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginians, after having stripped the dead, entered
Carthage in triumph, dragging after them the unfortunate
Regulus, and five hundred prisoners. Their joy was so much
the greater, as, but a very few days before, they had seen
themselves upon the brink of ruin. The men and women, old
and young people, crowded the temples, to return thanks to
the immortal gods; and several days were devoted wholly to
festivities and rejoicings.
</p>

<p>
Xanthippus, who had contributed so much to this happy
change, had the wisdom to withdraw shortly after, from the
apprehension lest his glory, which had hitherto been unsullied,
might, after this first blaze, insensibly fade away, and leave
him exposed to the darts of envy and calumny, which are
always dangerous, but most in a foreign country, when a man
stands alone, unsustained by friends and relations, and destitute
of all support.
</p>

<p>
Polybius tells us, that Xanthippus's departure was related
in a different manner, and promises to take notice of it in
another place: but that part of his history has not come down
to us. We read in Appian,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Bell. Pun.</hi> p. 30.</note> that the Carthaginians, excited
by a mean and detestable jealousy of Xanthippus's glory, and
unable to bear the thoughts that they should stand indebted to
Sparta for their safety; upon pretence of conducting him and
his attendants back with honour to his own country, with a
numerous convoy of ships, gave private orders to have them
all put to death in their passage; as if with him they could
have buried in the waves for ever the memory of his services,
and their horrid ingratitude to him.<note place='foot'>This
perfidious action, as it is related by Appian, may possibly be true, when
we consider the character of the Carthaginians, who were certainly a cruel and
treacherous people. But if it be fact, one would wonder why Polybius should reserve
for another occasion, the relation of an incident which comes in most properly
here, as it finishes at once the character and life of Xanthippus. His silence therefore
in this place makes me think, that he intended to bring Xanthippus again upon
the stage; and to exhibit him to the reader in a different light from that in which
he is placed by Appian. To this let me add, that it showed no great depth of policy
in the Carthaginians, to take this method of despatching him, when so many
others offered which were less liable to censure. In this scheme formed for his
destruction, not only himself, but all his followers, were to be murdered, without
the pretence of even a storm, or loss of one single Carthaginian, to cover or excuse
the perpetration of so horrid a crime.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>

<p>
<q>This battle,</q> says Polybius,<note place='foot'>Lib.
i. p. 36, 37.</note> <q>though not so considerable
as many others, may yet furnish very salutary instructions;
which,</q> adds that author, <q>is the greatest benefit that can be
reaped from the study of history.</q>
</p>

<p>
First, ought any man to put a great confidence in his good
fortune, after he has considered the fate of Regulus? That
general, insolent with victory, inexorable to the conquered,
scarcely deigning to listen to them, saw himself a few days
after vanquished by them, and made their prisoner. Hannibal
suggested the same reflection to Scipio, when he exhorted him
not to be dazzled with the success of his arms. Regulus, said
he, would have been recorded as one of the most uncommon
instances of valour and felicity, had he, after the victory obtained
in this very country, granted our fathers the peace which
they sued for. But putting no bounds to his ambition and the
insolence of success, the greater his prosperity, the more ignominious
was his fall.<note place='foot'>Inter pauca felicitatis
virtutisque exempla M. Atilius quondam in hâc eâdem
terrâ fuisset, si victor pacem petentibus dedisset patribus nostris. Sed non statuendo
tandem felicitati modum, nec cohibendo efferentem se fortunam, quanto altiùs elatus
erat, eo fœdiùs corruit. Liv. l. xxx. n. 30.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the second place, the truth of the saying of Euripides is
here seen in its full extent, <q>That one wise head is worth a
great many hands.</q><note place='foot'> Ὡς ἕν σοφὸν βούλευμα
τὰς πολλὰς χεῖρας νικᾶ. It may not be improper to take
notice in this place (as it was forgotten before) of a mistake of the learned Casaubon,
in his translation of a passage of Polybius concerning Xanthippus. The passage is
this, Ἐν οἷς καὶ Ξάνθιππόν τινα Λακεδαιμόνιον ἄνδρα τὴς Λακωνικῆς ἀγωγῆς μετεχηκότα,
καὶ τριβὴν ἐν τοῖς πολεμικοῖς ἔχοντα σύμμετρον. Which is thus rendered by Casaubon:
In queis [militibus sc. Græciâ allatis] Xanthippus quidam fuit Lacedæmonius, vir
disciplinà Laconicâ imbutus, et qui rei militaris usum mediocrem habebat. Whereas,
agreeably with the whole character and conduct of Xanthippus, I take the sense of
this passage to be, <q>a man formed by the Spartan discipline, and proportionably [not
moderately] skilful in military affairs.</q>&mdash;Trans.</note>
A single man here changes the whole
face of affairs. On one hand, he defeats troops which were
thought invincible; on the other, he revives the courage of
a city and an army, whom he had found in consternation and
despair.
</p>

<p>
Such, as Polybius observes, is the use which ought to be
made of the study of history. For there being two ways of
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
acquiring improvement and instruction, first by one's own experience,
and secondly by that of other men; it is much more wise and
useful to improve by other men's miscarriages than by our own.
</p>

<p>
I return to Regulus, that I may here finish what relates to
him; Polybius, to our great disappointment, taking no further
notice of that general.<note place='foot'>This silence of
Polybius has prejudiced a great many learned men against
many of the stories told of Regulus's barbarous treatment, after he was taken by the
Carthaginians. M. Rollin speaks no further of this matter; and therefore I shall
give my reader the substance of what is brought against the general belief of the
Roman writers, (as well historians as poets,) and of Appian on this subject. First, it
is urged, that Polybius was very sensible that the story of these cruelties was false;
and therefore, that he might not disoblige the Romans, by contradicting so general
a belief, he chose rather to be silent concerning Regulus after he was taken prisoner,
than to violate the truth of history, of which he was so strict an observer.
This opinion is further strengthened (say the adversaries of this belief) by a fragment
of Diodorus, which says, that the wife of Regulus, exasperated at the death of her
husband in Carthage, occasioned, as she imagined, by barbarous usage, persuaded
her sons to revenge the fate of their father, by the cruel treatment of two Carthaginian
captives (thought to be Bostar and Hamilcar) taken in the sea-fight against
Sicily, after the misfortune of Regulus, and put into her hands for the redemption of
her husband. One of these died by the severity of his imprisonment; and the
other, by the care of the senate, who detested the cruelty, survived, and was recovered
to health. This treatment of the captives, and the resentment of the senate
on that account, form a third argument or presumption against the truth of this
story of Regulus, which is thus argued. Regulus dying in his captivity by the
usual course of nature, his wife, thus frustrated of her hopes of redeeming him by
the exchange of her captives, treated them with the utmost barbarity in consequence
of her belief of the ill usage which Regulus had received. The senate being angry
with her for it, to give some colour to her cruelties, she gave out among her
acquaintance and kindred, that her husband died in the way generally related. This, like
all other reports, increased gradually; and, from the national hatred betwixt the
Carthaginians and Romans, was easily and generally believed by the latter. How
far this is conclusive against the testimonies of two such weighty authors as Cicero
and Seneca (to say nothing of the poets) is left to the judgment of the
reader.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3755. A. Rom. 499.</note>
After being kept some years in prison, he was sent to Rome
to propose an exchange of prisoners.<note place='foot'>Appian,
<hi rend='italic'>de Bella Pun.</hi> p. 2, 3. Cic.
<hi rend='italic'>de Off.</hi> l. iii. n. 99, 100. Aul. Gel. l. vi.
c. 4. Senec. <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> 99.</note> He had
been obliged to take an oath, that he would return
in case he proved unsuccessful. He then acquainted
the senate with the subject of his voyage; and being invited
by them to give his opinion freely, he answered, that he could
no longer do it as a senator, having lost both this quality, and
that of a Roman citizen, from the time that he had fallen into
the hands of his enemies; but he did not refuse to offer his
thoughts as a private person. This was a very delicate affair.
Every one was touched with the misfortunes of so great a
man. <q>He needed only,</q> says Cicero, <q>to have spoken one
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
word, and it would have restored him to his liberty, his estate,
his dignity, his wife, his children, and his country;</q> but that
word appeared to him contrary to the honour and welfare of
the state. He therefore plainly declared, that an exchange of
prisoners ought not to be so much as thought of: that such
an example would be of fatal consequence to the republic:
that citizens who had so basely surrendered their arms to the
enemy, were unworthy of the least compassion, and incapable
of serving their country; that with regard to himself, as he
was so far advanced in years, his death ought to be considered
as nothing; whereas they had in their hands several Carthaginian
generals, in the flower of their age, and capable of
doing their country great services for many years. It was
with difficulty that the senate complied with so generous and
unexampled a counsel. The illustrious exile therefore left
Rome, in order to return to Carthage, unmoved either with
the deep affliction of his friends, or the tears of his wife and
children, although he knew but too well the grievous torments
which were prepared for him.<note place='foot'>Horat. l. iii.
<hi rend='italic'>Od.</hi> 3.</note> And indeed, the moment his
enemies saw him returned without having obtained the exchange
of prisoners, they put him to every kind of torture
their barbarous cruelty could invent. They imprisoned him for
a long time in a dismal dungeon, whence (after cutting off his
eye-lids) they drew him at once into the sun, when its beams
darted the strongest heat. They next put him into a kind of
chest stuck full of nails, whose points wounding him did not
allow him a moment's ease either day or night. Lastly, after
having been long tormented by being kept for ever awake in
this dreadful torture, his merciless enemies nailed him to a
cross, their usual punishment, and left him to expire on it.
Such was the end of this great man. His enemies, by depriving
him of some days, perhaps years, of life, brought eternal
infamy on themselves.
</p>

<p>
The blow which the Romans had received in Africa did
not discourage them.<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. i. p.
37.</note> They made greater preparations than
before, to retrieve their loss; and put to sea, the following
campaign, three hundred and sixty vessels. The Carthaginians
sailed out to meet them with two hundred; but were
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
beaten in an engagement fought on the coasts of Sicily, and a
hundred and fourteen of their ships were taken by the Romans.
The latter sailed into Africa to take in the few soldiers
who had escaped the pursuit of the enemy, after the defeat of
Regulus; and had defended themselves vigorously in Clupea,<note place='foot'>Or
Clypea.&mdash;Trans.</note>
where they had been unsuccessfully besieged.
</p>

<p>
Here again we are astonished that the Romans, after so
considerable a victory, and with so large a fleet, should sail into
Africa, only to bring from thence a small garrison; whereas
they might have attempted the conquest of it, since Regulus,
with much fewer forces, had almost completed it.
</p>

<p>
The Romans, on their return, were overtaken by a storm,
which almost destroyed their whole fleet.<note place='foot'>Polyb.
l. i. p. 38-40.</note> The like misfortune
befell them also the following year.<note place='foot'>P. 41,
42.</note> However, they consoled
themselves for this double loss, by a victory which they gained
over Asdrubal, from whom they took near a hundred and forty
elephants. This news being brought to Rome, filled the whole
city with joy; not only because the strength of the enemy's
army was considerably diminished by the loss of their elephants,
but chiefly because this victory had inspired the land
forces with fresh courage; who, since the defeat of Regulus,
had not dared to venture upon an engagement; so great was
the terror with which those formidable animals had filled the
minds of all the soldiers. It was therefore judged proper to
make a greater effort than ever, in order to finish, if possible,
a war which had continued fourteen years. The two consuls
set sail with a fleet of two hundred ships, and arriving in Sicily,
formed the bold design of besieging Lilybæum. This was the
strongest town which the Carthaginians possessed, and the loss
of it would be attended with that of every part of the island
and open to the Romans a free passage into Africa.
</p>

<p>
The reader will suppose, that the utmost ardour was shown,
both in the assault and defence of the place.<note place='foot'>Ibid.
l. i. p. 44-50.</note> Imilcon was
governor there, with ten thousand regular forces, exclusive of
the inhabitants; and Hannibal, the son of Hamilcar, soon
brought him as many more from Carthage; he having, with
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
the most intrepid courage, forced his way through the enemy's
fleet, and arrived happily in the port.
</p>

<p>
The Romans had not lost any time. Having brought forward
their engines, they beat down several towers with their
battering rams; and gaining ground daily, they made such
progress, as gave the besieged, who now were closely pressed,
some fears. The governor saw plainly that there was no other
way left to save the city, but by firing the engines of the besiegers.
Having therefore prepared his forces for this enterprise,
he sent them out at daybreak with torches in their hands,
tow, and all kind of combustible matters; and at the same
time attacked all the engines. The Romans exerted their
utmost efforts to repel them, and the engagement was very
bloody. Every man, assailant as well as defendant, stood to
his post, and chose to die rather than quit it. At last, after
a long resistance and dreadful slaughter, the besieged sounded
a retreat, and left the Romans in possession of their works.
This conflict being over, Hannibal embarked in the night, and
concealing his departure from the enemy, sailed for Drepanum,
where Adherbal commanded for the Carthaginians. Drepanum
was advantageously situated; having a commodious port, and
lying about a hundred and twenty furlongs from Lilybæum;
and the Carthaginians had been always very desirous of preserving
it.
</p>

<p>
The Romans, animated by their late success, renewed the
attack with greater vigour than ever; the besieged not daring
to make a second attempt to burn their machines, so much
were they disheartened by the ill success of the former. But
a furious wind rising suddenly, some mercenary soldiers represented
to the governor, that now was the favourable opportunity
for them to fire the engines of the besiegers, especially
as the wind blew full against them; and they offered themselves
for the enterprise. The offer was accepted, and accordingly
they were furnished with every thing necessary. In a
moment the fire caught all the engines; and the Romans
could not possibly extinguish it, because the flames being spread
instantly every where, the wind carried the sparks and smoke
full in their eyes, so that they could not see where to apply
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
relief; whereas their enemies saw clearly where to aim their
strokes, and throw their fire. This accident made the Romans
lose all hopes of being ever able to carry the place by force.
They therefore turned the siege into a blockade; raised a strong
line of contravallation round the town; and, dispersing their
army in every part of the neighbourhood, resolved to effect by
time, what they found themselves absolutely unable to perform
any other way.
</p>

<p>
When the transactions of the siege of Lilybæum, and the
loss of part of the forces, were known at Rome, the citizens, so
far from desponding at this ill news, seemed to be fired with
new vigour.<note place='foot'>Polyb. p. 50.</note>
Every man strove to be foremost in the muster
roll; so that, in a very little time, an army of ten thousand
men was raised, who, crossing the strait, marched by land to
join the besiegers.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3756. A. Rom. 500.</note>
At the same time, P. Claudius Pulcher, the consul, formed
a design of attacking Adherbal in Drepanum.<note place='foot'>Ibid. p. 51.</note> He
thought himself sure of surprising him, because, after
the loss lately sustained by the Romans at Lilybæum,
the enemy could not imagine that they would venture out
again at sea. Flushed with these hopes, he sailed out with
his fleet in the night, the better to conceal his design. But he
had to do with an active general, whose vigilance he could not
elude, and who did not even give him time to draw up his
ships in line of battle, but fell vigorously upon him whilst his
fleet was in disorder and confusion. The Carthaginians gained
a complete victory. Of the Roman fleet, only thirty vessels
got off, which being in company with the consul, fled with him,
and got away in the best manner they could along the coast.
All the rest, amounting to fourscore and thirteen, with the
men on board them, were taken by the Carthaginians; a few
soldiers excepted, who had escaped from the wreck of their
vessels. This victory displayed as much the prudence and
valour of Adherbal, as it reflected shame and ignominy on the
Roman consul.
</p>

<p>
Junius, his colleague, was neither more prudent nor more
fortunate than himself, but lost his whole fleet by his ill
conduct.<note place='foot'>Ibid. p. 54-59.</note>
Endeavouring to atone for his misfortune by some
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
considerable action, he held a secret correspondence with the
inhabitants of Eryx,<note place='foot'>A city and mountain of
Sicily.&mdash;Trans.</note> and by that means got the city surrendered
to him. On the summit of the mountain stood the
temple of Venus Erycina, which was certainly the most beautiful
as well as the richest of all the Sicilian temples. The
city stood a little below the summit of this mountain, and the
only access to it was by a road very long and very rugged.
Junius posted one part of his troops upon the top, and the
remainder at the foot of the mountain, imagining that he now
had nothing to fear; but Hamilcar, surnamed Barca, father
of the famous Hannibal, found means to get into the city,
which lay between the two camps of the enemy, and there
fortified himself. From this advantageous post he harassed
the Romans incessantly for two years. One can scarce conceive
how it was possible for the Carthaginians to defend
themselves, when thus attacked from both the summit and foot
of the mountain; and unable to get provisions, but from a
little port, which was the only one open to them. By such
enterprises as these, the abilities and prudent courage of a
general, are as well, or perhaps better discovered, than by the
winning of a battle.
</p>

<p>
For five years, nothing memorable was performed on either
side.<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. i. p. 59-62.</note>
The Romans had imagined that their land forces would
alone be capable of finishing the siege of Lilybæum: but as
they saw it protracted beyond their expectation, they returned
to their first plan, and made extraordinary efforts to fit out a
new fleet. The public treasury was at a low ebb; but this
want was supplied by the zeal of individuals; so ardent was
the love which the Romans bore their country. Every man,
according to his circumstances, contributed to the common
expense; and, upon public security, advanced money, without
the least scruple, for an expedition on which the glory and
safety of Rome depended. One man fitted out a ship at his
own charge; another was equipped by the contributions of
two or three; so that, in a very little time, two hundred
were ready for sailing.
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3763. A. Rom. 507.</note>
The command was given to Lutatius the consul, who immediately put to sea.
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
The enemy's fleet had retired into Africa: the consul therefore
easily seized upon all the advantageous posts in the neighbourhood
of Lilybæum; and foreseeing that he should soon be
forced to fight, he omitted no precautions to ensure success;
and employed the interval in exercising his soldiers and seamen
at sea.
</p>

<p>
He was soon informed that the Carthaginian fleet drew near,
under the command of Hanno, who landed in a small island
called Hiera, opposite to Drepanum. His design was to reach
Eryx undiscovered by the Romans, in order to supply the army
there; to reinforce his troops, and take Barca on board to
assist him in the expected engagement. But the consul, suspecting
his intention, was beforehand with him; and having
assembled all his best forces, sailed for the small island
Ægusa,<note place='foot'>These islands are also called Ægates.&mdash;Trans.</note>
which lay near the other. He acquainted his officers with the
design he had of attacking the enemy on the morrow. Accordingly,
at daybreak, he prepared to engage: unfortunately
the wind was favourable for the enemy, which made him hesitate
whether he should give him battle. But considering that
the Carthaginian fleet, when unloaded of its provisions, would
become lighter and more fit for action; and, besides, would be
considerably strengthened by the forces and presence of Barca
he came to a resolution at once; and, notwithstanding the foul
weather, made directly to the enemy. The consul had choice
forces, able seamen, and excellent ships, built after the model
of a galley that had been lately taken from the enemy; and
which was the completest in its kind that had ever been seen.
The Carthaginians, on the other hand, were destitute of all
these advantages. As they had been the entire masters at sea
for some years, and the Romans did not once dare to face them,
they held them in the highest contempt, and looked upon
themselves as invincible. On the first report of the enemy
being in motion, the Carthaginians had put to sea a fleet fitted
out in haste, as appeared from every circumstance of it: the
soldiers and seamen being all mercenaries, newly levied, without
the least experience, resolution, or zeal, since it was not
for their own country they were going to fight. This soon
appeared in the engagement. They could not sustain the first
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
attack. Fifty of their vessels were sunk, and seventy taken,
with their whole crews. The rest, favoured by a wind which
rose very seasonably for them, made the best of their way to
the little island from whence they had sailed. There were
upwards of ten thousand taken prisoners. The consul sailed
immediately for Lilybæum, and joined his forces to those of
the besiegers.
</p>

<p>
When the news of this defeat arrived at Carthage, it occasioned
so much the greater surprise and terror, as it was less
expected. The senate, however, did not lose their courage,
though they saw themselves quite unable to continue the war.
As the Romans were now masters of the sea, it was not possible
for the Carthaginians to send either provisions, or reinforcements,
to the armies in Sicily. An express was therefore immediately
despatched to Barca, the general there, empowering
him to act as he should think proper. Barca, so long as he
had room to entertain the least hopes, had done every thing
that could be expected from the most intrepid courage and the
most consummate wisdom. But having now no resource left,
he sent a deputation to the consul, in order to treat about a
peace. <q>Prudence,</q> says Polybius, <q>consists in knowing how
to resist and yield at a seasonable juncture.</q> Lutatius was not
insensible how tired the Romans were grown of a war, which
had exhausted them both of men and money; and the dreadful
consequences which had attended on Regulus's inexorable and
imprudent obstinacy, were fresh in his memory. He therefore
complied without difficulty, and dictated the following treaty.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>There shall be peace between Rome and Carthage
(in case the Roman people approve of it) on the following
conditions: The Carthaginians shall evacuate
all Sicily; shall no longer make war upon Hiero,
the Syracusans, or their allies: They shall restore
to the Romans, without ransom, all the prisoners
which they have taken from them; and pay them,
within twenty years, two thousand two hundred
Euboic talents of silver.</hi><note place='foot'>This sum
amounts to near six millions one hundred and eighty thousand French
livres, or 515,000<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> English money.</note>
It is worth the reader's
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
remarking, by the way, the simple, exact, and clear terms in
which this treaty is expressed; that, in so short a compass,
adjusts the interests of two powerful republics and their allies,
both by sea and land.
</p>

<p>
When these conditions were brought to Rome, the people,
not approving of them, sent ten commissioners to Sicily, to
terminate the affair. These made no alteration as to the
substance of the treaty;<note place='foot'>Polyb. l.
iii. p. 182.</note> only shortening the time appointed
for the payment, reducing it to ten years: a thousand talents
were added to the sum that had been stipulated, which were
to be paid immediately; and the Carthaginians were required
to depart out of all the islands situated between Italy and
Sicily. Sardinia was not comprehended in this treaty; but
they gave it up by another treaty which was made some years
afterwards.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3763. A. Carth. 605. A. Rom. 507. Ant. J.C. 241.</note>
Such was the conclusion of a war, one of the longest mentioned
in history, since it continued twenty-four years
without intermission. The obstinacy, in disputing for
empire, was equal on either side: the same resolution,
the same greatness of soul, in forming as well
as in executing of projects, being conspicuous on both
sides. The Carthaginians had the superiority in their acquaintance
with naval affairs; in their skill in the construction
of their vessels; the working of them; the experience and
capacity of their pilots; the knowledge of coasts, shallows,
roads, and winds; and in the inexhaustible fund of wealth,
which furnished all the expenses of so long and obstinate a
war. The Romans had none of these advantages; but their
courage, zeal for the public good, love of their country, and a
noble emulation of glory, supplied all other deficiencies. We
are astonished to see a nation, so raw and inexperienced in
naval affairs, not only making head against a people who were
better skilled in them, and more powerful than any that had
ever been before; but even gaining several victories over them
at sea. No difficulties or calamities could discourage them.
They certainly would not have thought of peace, in the circumstances
under which the Carthaginians demanded it. One
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
unfortunate campaign dispirits the latter; whereas the Romans
are not shaken by a succession of them.
</p>

<p>
As to soldiers, there was no comparison between those of
Rome and Carthage, the former being infinitely superior in
point of courage. Among the generals who commanded in
this war, Hamilcar, surnamed Barca, was, doubtless, the most
conspicuous for his bravery and prudence.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Libyan War; or against the
Mercenaries.</hi><note place='foot'>Polyb. l. i. p. 65-89.</note>&mdash;The war
which the Carthaginians waged against the Romans, was
succeeded immediately by another,<note place='foot'>The same
year that the first Punic war ended.&mdash;Trans.</note> which, though of much
shorter continuance, was infinitely more dangerous; as it was
carried on in the very heart of the republic, and attended with
such cruelty and barbarity, as is scarce to be paralleled in
history; I mean the war which the Carthaginians were obliged
to sustain against their mercenary troops, who had served
under them in Sicily, and which is commonly called the
African or Libyan war.<note place='foot'>And sometimes ξενικὸν, or the war with the
mercenaries.&mdash;Trans.</note> It continued only three years and a
half, but was a very bloody one. The occasion of it was this:
</p>

<p>
As soon as the treaty was concluded with the
Romans,<note place='foot'>Ibid. p. 66.</note>
Hamilcar, having carried to Lilybæum the forces which were
in Eryx, resigned his commission; and left to Gisgo, governor
of the place, the care of transporting these forces into Africa.
Gisgo, as though he had foreseen what would happen, did not
ship them all off at once, but in small and separate parties, in
order that those who came first might be paid off, and sent
home, before the arrival of the rest. This conduct evinced
great forecast and wisdom, but was not seconded equally at
Carthage. As the republic had been exhausted by the expense
of a long war, and the payment of near one hundred and thirty
thousand pounds to the Romans on signing the peace, the
forces were not paid off in proportion as they arrived; but it
was thought proper to wait for the rest, in the hopes of obtaining
from them (when they should be all together) a remission
of some part of their arrears. This was the first oversight.
</p>

<p>
Here we discover the genius of a state composed of merchants,
who know the full value of money, but are little
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
acquainted with that of the services of soldiers; who bargain
for blood, as though it were an article of trade, and always go
to the cheapest market. In such a republic, when an exigency
is once answered, the merit of services is no longer
remembered.
</p>

<p>
These soldiers, most of whom came to Carthage, having
been long accustomed to a licentious life, caused great disturbances
in the city; to remedy which, it was proposed to
their officers, to march them all to a little neighbouring town
called Sicca, and there supply them with whatever was necessary
for their subsistence, till the arrival of the rest of their
companions; and that then they should all be paid off, and
sent home. This was a second oversight.
</p>

<p>
A third was, the refusing to let them leave their baggage,
their wives, and children in Carthage, as they desired; and the
forcing them to remove these to Sicca; whereas, had they
staid in Carthage, they would have been in a manner so many
hostages.
</p>

<p>
Being all met together at Sicca, they began (having little
else to do) to compute the arrears of their pay, which they
made amount to much more than was really due to them.
To this computation, they added the mighty promises which
had been made them, at different times, as an encouragement
for them to do their duty; and pretended that these likewise
ought to be brought into the account. Hanno, who was then
governor of Africa, and had been sent to them from the magistrates
of Carthage, proposed to them to consent to some
abatement of their arrears; and to content themselves with
receiving a part, in consideration of the great distress to which
the commonwealth was reduced, and its present unhappy circumstances.
The reader will easily guess how such a proposal
was received. Complaints, murmurs, seditious and insolent
clamours, were every where heard. These troops being composed
of different nations, who were strangers to one another's
language, were incapable of hearing reason when they once
mutinied. Spaniards, Gauls, Ligurians; inhabitants of the
Balearic isles; Greeks, the greatest part of them slaves or
deserters, and a very great number of Africans, composed
these mercenary forces. Transported with rage, they immediately
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
break up, march towards Carthage, (being upwards of
twenty thousand,) and encamp at Tunis, not far from that
metropolis.
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginians discovered too late their error. There
was no compliance, how grovelling soever, to which they did
not stoop, to soothe these exasperated soldiers: who, on their
side, practised every knavish art which could be thought of,
in order to extort money from them. When one point was
gained, they immediately had recourse to a new artifice, on
which to ground some new demand. Was their pay settled
beyond the agreement made with them, they still would be
reimbursed for the losses which they pretended to have sustained,
either by the death of their horses, by the excessive
price which, at certain times, they had paid for bread-corn;
and still insisted on the recompense which had been promised
them. As nothing could be fixed, the Carthaginians, with
great difficulty, prevailed on them to refer themselves to the
opinion of some general who had commanded in Sicily. Accordingly
they pitched upon Gisgo, who had always been very
acceptable to them. This general harangued them in a mild
and insinuating manner; recalled to their memories the long
time they had been in the Carthaginian service; the considerable
sums they had received from the republic; and granted
almost all their demands.
</p>

<p>
The treaty was upon the point of being concluded, when
two mutineers occasioned a tumult in every part of the camp.
One of those was Spendius a Capuan, who had been a slave at
Rome, and had fled to the Carthaginians. He was tall and
bold. The fear he was under, of falling into the hands of his
former master, by whom he was sure to be hanged, (as was
the custom,) prompted him to break off the agreement. He was
seconded by one Matho,<note place='foot'>Matho was
an African, and free born; but as he had been active in raising
the rebellion, an accommodation would have ruined him. He, therefore, despairing
of a pardon, embraced the interests of Spendius with more zeal than any of the
rebels; and first insinuated to the Africans the danger of concluding a peace, as this
would leave them alone, and exposed to the rage of their old masters. Polyb. p. 98.
edit. Gronov.&mdash;Trans.</note> who had been very active in forming
the conspiracy. These two represented to the Africans, that
the instant after their companions should be discharged and
sent home, they, being thus left alone in their own country,
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
would fall a sacrifice to the rage of the Carthaginians, who
would take vengeance upon them for the common rebellion.
This was sufficient to raise them to fury. They immediately
made choice of Spendius and Matho for their chiefs. No
remonstrances were heard; and whoever offered to make any,
was immediately put to death. They ran to Gisgo's tent,
plundered it of the money designed for the payment of the
forces: dragged that general himself to prison, with all his
attendants; after having treated them with the utmost indignities.
All the cities of Africa, to whom they had sent deputies
to exhort them to recover their liberty, came over to them,
Utica and Hippacra excepted, which they therefore immediately
besieged.
</p>

<p>
Carthage had never been before exposed to such imminent
danger. The citizens individually drew each his subsistence
from the rents or revenues of their lands, and the public
expenses from the tribute paid by Africa. But all this was
stopped at once; and (a much worse circumstance) was
turned against them. They found themselves destitute of arms
and forces, either for sea or land; of all necessary preparations
either for the sustaining of a siege, or the equipping of a fleet;
and, to complete their misfortunes, without any hopes of
foreign assistance, either from their friends or allies.
</p>

<p>
They might, in some sense, impute to themselves the distress
to which they were reduced. During the last war, they
had treated the African nations with the utmost rigour, by
imposing excessive tributes on them, in the exaction of which
no allowance was made for poverty and extreme misery; and
governors, such as Hanno, were treated with the greater respect,
the more severe they had been in levying those tributes.
So that no great efforts were necessary to prevail upon the
Africans to engage in this rebellion. At the very first signal
that was made, it broke out, and in a moment became general.
The women, who had often, with the deepest affliction, seen
their husbands and fathers dragged to prison for non-payment,
were more exasperated than the men; and with pleasure gave
up all their ornaments towards the expenses of the war; so
that the chiefs of the rebels, after paying all they had promised
the soldiers, found themselves still in the midst of plenty: an
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
instructive lesson, says Polybius, to ministers, how a people
should be treated; as it teaches them to look, not only to the
present occasion, but to extend their views to futurity.
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginians, notwithstanding their present distress,
did not despond, but made the most extraordinary efforts.
The command of the army was given to Hanno. Troops were
levied by land and sea; horse as well as foot. All citizens,
capable of bearing arms, were mustered; mercenaries were
invited from all parts; and all the ships which the republic had
left were refitted.
</p>

<p>
The rebels discovered no less ardour. We related before,
that they had formed the siege of the two only cities which
refused to join them. Their army was now increased to
seventy thousand men. After detachments had been drawn
from it to carry on those sieges, they pitched their camp at
Tunis; and thereby held Carthage in a kind of blockade, filling
it with perpetual alarms, and frequently advancing up to
its very walls by day as well as by night.
</p>

<p>
Hanno had marched to the relief of Utica, and gained a
considerable advantage, which, had he made a proper use of
it, might have proved decisive: but entering the city, and only
diverting himself there, the mercenaries, who had retreated to
a neighbouring hill covered with trees, hearing how careless
the enemy were, poured down upon them; found the soldiers
straggling in all parts; took and plundered the camp, and
seized upon all the supplies that had been brought from Carthage
for the relief of the besieged. Nor was this the only
error committed by Hanno; and errors, in such critical junctures,
are much the most fatal. Hamilcar, surnamed Barca,
was therefore appointed to succeed him. This general answered
the idea which had been entertained of him; and his
first success was the obliging the rebels to raise the siege of
Utica. He then marched against their army which was encamped
near Carthage; defeated part of it, and seized almost
all their advantageous posts. These successes revived the
courage of the Carthaginians.
</p>

<p>
The arrival of a young Numidian nobleman, Naravasus by
name, who, out of esteem for the person and merit of Barca,
joined him with two thousand Numidians, was of great service
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
to that general. Animated by this reinforcement, he fell upon
the rebels, who had cooped him up in a valley; killed ten
thousand of them, and took four thousand prisoners. The
young Numidian distinguished himself greatly in this battle.
Barca took into his troops as many of the prisoners as were
desirous of being enlisted, and gave the rest free liberty to go
wherever they pleased, on condition that they should never
take up arms any more against the Carthaginians; otherwise,
that every man of them, if taken, should be put to death. This
conduct proves the wisdom of that general. He thought this
a better expedient than extreme severity. And indeed where
a multitude of mutineers are concerned, the greatest part of
whom have been drawn in by the persuasions of the most hotheaded,
or through fear of the most furious, clemency seldom
fails of being successful.
</p>

<p>
Spendius, the chief of the rebels, fearing that this affected
lenity of Barca might occasion a defection among his troops,
thought the only expedient left him to prevent it, would be, to
strike some signal blow, which would deprive them of all hopes
of being ever reconciled to the enemy. With this view, after
having read to them some fictitious letters, by which advice
was given him, of a secret design concerted betwixt some
of their comrades and Gisgo for rescuing him out of prison,
where he had been so long detained; he brought them to the
barbarous resolution of murdering him and all the rest of the
prisoners; and any man, who durst offer any milder counsel,
was immediately sacrificed to their fury. Accordingly, this
unfortunate general, and seven hundred prisoners who were
confined with him, were brought out to the front of the camp,
where Gisgo fell the first sacrifice, and afterwards all the rest.
Their hands were cut off, their thighs broken, and their bodies,
still breathing, were thrown into a hole. The Carthaginians
sent a herald to demand their remains, in order to pay them
the last sad office, but were refused; and the herald was further
told, that whoever presumed to come upon the like errand,
should meet with Gisgo's fate. And, indeed, the rebels immediately
came to the unanimous resolution, of treating all such
Carthaginians as should fall into their hands in the same barbarous
manner; and decreed farther, that if any of their allies
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
were taken, they should, after their hands were cut off, be sent
back to Carthage. This bloody resolution was but too punctually
executed.
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginians were now just beginning to breathe, as it
were, and recover their spirits, when a number of unlucky accidents
plunged them again into fresh dangers. A division arose
among their generals; and the provisions, of which they were
in extreme necessity, coming to them by sea, were all cast away
in a storm. But the misfortune which they most keenly felt,
was, the sudden defection of the two only cities which till then
had preserved their allegiance, and in all times adhered inviolably
to the commonwealth. These were Utica and Hippacra.
These cities, without the least reason, or even so much as a
pretence, went over at once to the rebels; and, transported
with the like rage and fury, murdered the governor, with the
garrison sent to their relief; and carried their inhumanity so
far, as to refuse their dead bodies to the Carthaginians, who
demanded them back in order for burial.
</p>

<p>
The rebels, animated by so much success, laid siege to Carthage,
but were obliged immediately to raise it. They nevertheless
continued the war. Having drawn together, into one
body, all their own troops and those of the allies, (making upwards
of fifty thousand men in all,) they watched the motions
of Hamilcar's army, but carefully kept their own on the hills;
and avoided coming down into the plains, because the enemy
would there have had too great an advantage over them, on
account of their elephants and cavalry. Hamilcar, more skilful
in the art of war than they, never exposed himself to any of
their attacks; but taking advantage of their oversights, often
dispossessed them of their posts, if their soldiers straggled but
ever so little; and harassed them a thousand ways. Such of
them as fell into his hands, were thrown to wild beasts. At
last, he surprised them at a time when they least expected it,
and shut them up in a post which was so situated, that it was
impossible for them to get out of it. Not daring to venture a
battle, and being unable to get off, they began to fortify their
camp, and surrounded it with ditches and intrenchments. But
an enemy among themselves, and which was much more formidable,
had reduced them to the greatest extremity: this was
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
hunger, which was so raging, that they at last ate one another;
Divine Providence, says Polybius, thus revenging upon themselves
the barbarous cruelty they had exercised on others.
They now had no resource left; and knew but too well the
punishments which would be inflicted on them, in case they
should fall alive into the hands of the enemy. After such
bloody scenes as had been acted by them, they did not so
much as think of peace, or of coming to an accommodation.
They had sent to their forces encamped at Tunis for assistance,
but with no success. In the mean time the famine increased
daily. They had first eaten their prisoners, then their slaves;
and now their fellow-citizens only were left. Their chiefs, now
no longer able to resist the complaints and cries of the multitude,
who threatened to massacre them if they did not surrender,
went themselves to Hamilcar, after having obtained a safe
conduct from him. The conditions of the treaty were, that the
Carthaginians should select any ten of the rebels, to treat them
as they should think fit, and that the rest should be dismissed
with only one suit of clothes for each. When the treaty was
signed, the chiefs themselves were arrested and detained by the
Carthaginians, who plainly showed, on this occasion, that they
did not pride themselves upon their good faith and sincerity.
The rebels, hearing that their chiefs were seized, and knowing
nothing of the convention, suspected that they were betrayed,
and thereupon immediately took up arms. But Hamilcar,
having surrounded them, brought forward his elephants; and
either trod them all under foot, or cut them to pieces, they
being upwards of forty thousand.
</p>

<p>
The consequence of this victory was, the reduction of almost
all the cities of Africa, which immediately returned to their
allegiance. Hamilcar, without loss of time, marched against
Tunis, which, ever since the beginning of the war, had been
the asylum of the rebels, and their place of arms. He invested
it on one side, whilst Hannibal, who was joined in the command
with him, besieged it on the other. Then advancing
near the walls, and ordering crosses to be set up, he hung
Spendius on one of them, and his companions who had been
seized with him on the rest, where they all expired. Matho,
the other chief, who commanded in the city, saw plainly by
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
this what he himself might expect; and for that reason was
much more attentive to his own defence. Perceiving that
Hannibal, as being confident of success, was very negligent in
all his motions, he made a sally, attacked his quarters, killed
many of his men, took several prisoners, among whom was
Hannibal himself, and plundered his camp. Then taking
Spendius from the cross, he put Hannibal in his place, after
having made him suffer inexpressible torments; and sacrificed
round the body of Spendius thirty citizens of the first quality in
Carthage, as so many victims of his vengeance. One would
conclude, that there had been a mutual emulation betwixt the
contending parties, which of them should outdo the other in
acts of the most barbarous cruelty.
</p>

<p>
Barca being at that time at a distance, it was long before the
news of his colleague's misfortune reached him; and besides,
the road lying betwixt the two camps being impassable, it was
impossible for him to advance hastily to his assistance. This
disastrous accident caused a great consternation in Carthage.
The reader may have observed, in the course of this war, a
continual vicissitude of prosperity and adversity, of security
and fear, of joy and grief; so various and inconstant were the
events on either side.
</p>

<p>
In Carthage it was thought advisable to make one bold effort.
Accordingly, all the youth capable of bearing arms were pressed
into the service. Hanno was sent to join Hamilcar; and thirty
senators were deputed to conjure those generals, in the name of
the republic, to forget past quarrels, and sacrifice their resentments
to their country's welfare. This was immediately complied
with; they mutually embraced, and were reconciled
sincerely to one another.
</p>

<p>
From this time, the Carthaginians were successful in all
things; and Matho, who in every attempt after this came off
with disadvantage, at last thought himself obliged to hazard a
battle; and this was just what the Carthaginians wanted. The
leaders on both sides animated their troops, as going to fight
a battle which would for ever decide their fate. An engagement
ensued. Victory was not long in suspense; for the
rebels every where giving ground, the Africans were almost
all slain, and the rest surrendered. Matho was taken alive
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
and carried to Carthage. All Africa returned immediately to
its allegiance, except the two perfidious cities which had lately
revolted; however, they were soon forced to surrender at
discretion.
</p>

<p>
And now the victorious army returned to Carthage, and was
there received with shouts of joy, and the congratulations of
the whole city. Matho and his soldiers, after having adorned
the public triumph, were led to execution; and finished, by a
painful and ignominious death, a life that had been polluted
with the blackest treasons and unparalleled barbarities. Such
was the conclusion of the war against the mercenaries, after
having lasted three years and four months. It furnished, says
Polybius, an ever-memorable lesson to all nations, not to
employ in their armies a greater number of mercenaries than
citizens; nor to rely, for the defence of their state, on a body of
men who are not attached to it either by interest or affection.
</p>

<p>
I have hitherto purposely deferred taking notice of such
transactions in Sardinia, as passed at the time I have been
speaking of, and which were, in some measure, dependent on,
and resulting from, the war waged in Africa against the mercenaries.
They exhibit the same violent methods to promote
rebellion; the same excesses of cruelty; as if the wind had
carried the same spirit of discord and fury from Africa into
Sardinia.
</p>

<p>
When the news was brought there of what Spendius and
Matho were doing in Africa, the mercenaries in that island
also shook off the yoke, in imitation of these incendiaries.
They began by the murder of Bostar their general, and of all
the Carthaginians under him. A successor was sent; but all
the forces which he carried with him went over to the rebels;
hung the general on a cross; and, throughout the whole
island, put all the Carthaginians to the sword, after having
made them suffer inexpressible torments. They then besieged
all the cities one after another, and soon got possession of the
whole country. But feuds arising between them and the
natives, the mercenaries were driven entirely out of the island,
and took refuge in Italy. Thus the Carthaginians lost Sardinia,
an island of great importance to them, on account of
its extent, its fertility, and the great number of its inhabitants.
</p>

<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>

<p>
The Romans, ever since their treaty with the Carthaginians,
had behaved towards them with great justice and moderation.
A slight quarrel, on account of some Roman merchants
who were seized at Carthage for having supplied the enemy
with provisions, had embroiled them a little. But these merchants
being restored on the first complaint made to the senate
of Carthage; the Romans, who prided themselves upon their
justice and generosity on all occasions, made the Carthaginians
a return of their former friendship; served them to the utmost
of their power; forbade their merchants to furnish any other
nation with provisions; and even refused to listen to the proposals
made by the Sardinian rebels, when invited by them to
take possession of the island.
</p>

<p>
But these scruples and delicacy wore off by degrees; and
Cæsar's advantageous testimony (in Sallust) of their honesty
and plain-dealing, could not with any propriety be applied
here:<note place='foot'>Bellis Punicis omnibus, cum sæpe Carthaginenses et in pace et
per inducias multa nefanda facinora fecissent, nunquam ipsi per occasionem talia fecere:
magis quod se dignum foret, quàm quod in illos jure fieri posset, quærebant. Sallust.
<hi rend='italic'>in Bell. Gatilin.</hi>&mdash;Trans.</note>
<q>Although,</q> says he, <q>in all the Punic wars, the Carthaginians,
both in peace and during truces, had committed a
number of detestable actions, the Romans could never (how
inviting soever the opportunity might be) be prevailed upon
to retaliate such usage; being more attentive to their own
glory, than to the revenge they might have justly taken on
such perfidious enemies.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3767. A. Carth. 609. A. Rom. 511. Ant. J.C. 237.</note>
The mercenaries, who, as was observed, had retired into
Italy, brought the Romans at last to the resolution
of sailing over into Sardinia, to render themselves
masters of it. The Carthaginians were deeply afflicted
at the news, upon pretence that they had a
more just title to Sardinia than the Romans; they
therefore put themselves in a posture to take a speedy and
just revenge on those who had excited the people of that
island to take up arms against them. But the Romans, pretending
that these preparations were made not against Sardinia
but their state, declared war against the Carthaginians. The
latter, quite exhausted in every respect, and scarce beginning
to breathe, were in no condition to sustain a war. The
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
necessity of the times was therefore to be complied with, and
they were forced to yield to a more powerful rival. A fresh
treaty was thereupon made, by which they gave up Sardinia
to the Romans; and obliged themselves to a new payment
of twelve hundred talents, to keep off the war with which
they were menaced. This injustice of the Romans was
the true cause of the second Punic war, as will appear in the
sequel.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The second Punic War.</hi><note place='foot'>Liv.
l. xxi. n. 1.</note>&mdash;The second Punic war, which I
am now going to relate, is one of the most memorable recorded
in history, and most worthy the attention of an inquisitive
reader; whether we consider the boldness of the enterprises;
the wisdom employed in the execution; the obstinate
efforts of two rival nations, and the ready resources they found
in their lowest ebb of fortune; the variety of uncommon
events, and the uncertain issue of so long and bloody a war;
or lastly, the assemblage of the most perfect models in every
kind of merit; and the most instructive lessons that occur in
history, either with regard to war, policy, or government.
Never did two more powerful, or at least more warlike, states
or nations make war against each other; and never had these
in question seen themselves raised to a more exalted pitch of
power and glory. Rome and Carthage were, doubtless, at
that time, the two first states of the world. Having already
tried their strength in the first Punic war, and thereby made
an essay of each other's power, they knew perfectly well what
either could do. In this second war, the fate of arms was so
equally balanced, and the success so intermixed with vicissitudes
and varieties, that that party triumphed which had been
most in danger of being ruined. Great as the forces of these
two nations were, it may almost be said, that their mutual
hatred was still greater. The Romans, on one side, could not
without indignation see the vanquished presuming to attack
them; and the Carthaginians, on the other, were exasperated
at the equally rapacious and harsh treatment which they pretended
to have received from the victor.
</p>

<p>
The plan which I have laid down does not permit me to
enter into an exact detail of this war, whereof Italy, Sicily,
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
Spain, and Africa, were the several seats; and which has a still
closer connection with the Roman history than with that I am
now writing. I shall confine myself therefore, principally, to
such transactions as relate to the Carthaginians: and endeavour,
as far as I am able, to give my reader an idea of the
genius and character of Hannibal, who perhaps was the greatest
warrior that antiquity has to boast of.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The remote and more immediate Causes of the second Punic
War.</hi>&mdash;Before I come to speak of the declaration of war
betwixt the Romans and Carthaginians, I think it necessary to
explain the true causes of it; and to point out by what steps
this rupture, betwixt these two nations, was so long preparing,
before it openly broke out.
</p>

<p>
That man would be grossly mistaken, says Polybius,<note place='foot'>Lib.
iii. p. 162-168.</note> who
should look upon the taking of Saguntum by Hannibal as the
true cause of the second Punic war. The regret of the Carthaginians
for having so tamely given up Sicily, by the treaty
which terminated the first Punic war; the injustice and violence
of the Romans, who took advantage of the troubles
excited in Africa, to dispossess the Carthaginians of Sardinia,
and to impose a new tribute on them; and the success and
conquests of the latter in Spain; these were the true causes
of the violation of the treaty, as Livy<note place='foot'>Angebant
ingentis spiritûs virum Sicilia Sardiniaque amissæ: Nam et Siciliam
nimis celeri desperatione rerum concessam; et Sardiniam inter motum Africæ fraude
Romanorum, stipendio etiam superimposito, interceptam. Liv. l. xxi. n.
1.&mdash;Trans.</note> (agreeing here with
Polybius) insinuates in few words, in the beginning of his
history of the second Punic war.
</p>

<p>
And indeed Hamilcar, surnamed Barca, was highly exasperated
on account of the last treaty, which the necessity of
the times had compelled the Carthaginians to submit to; and
he therefore meditated the design of taking just, though distant
measures, for breaking it on the first favourable opportunity
that should offer.
</p>

<p>
When the troubles of Africa were appeased, he was sent
upon an expedition against the Numidians;<note place='foot'>Polyb.
l. ii. p. 90.</note> in which, giving
fresh proofs of his courage and abilities, his merit raised him
to the command of the army which was to act in Spain. Hannibal,
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
his son, at that time but nine years of age, begged with
the utmost importunity to attend him on this occasion;<note place='foot'>Polyb.
l. iii. p. 167. Liv. l. xxi. n. 1.</note> and
for that purpose employed all the soothing arts so common to
children of his age, and which have so much power over a
tender father. Hamilcar could not refuse him; and after
having made him swear upon the altars, that he would declare
himself an enemy to the Romans as soon as age would allow
him to do it, he took his son with him.
</p>

<p>
Hamilcar possessed all the qualities which constitute the
great general. To an invincible courage, and the most consummate
prudence, he added a most engaging and insinuating
behaviour. He subdued, in a very short time, the greatest
part of the nations of Spain, either by the terror of his arms
or his engaging conduct; and after enjoying the command
there nine years, came to an end worthy his exalted character,
dying gloriously in arms for the cause of his country.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3776. A. Rom. 520.</note>
The Carthaginians appointed Asdrubal, his son-in-law, to
succeed him.<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. ii. p.
101.</note> This general, to strengthen his footing
in the country, built a city, which, by the advantage
of its situation, the commodiousness of its harbour,
its fortifications, and opulence occasioned by its great commerce,
became one of the most considerable cities in the world.
It was called New Carthage, and is at this day known by the
name of Carthagena.
</p>

<p>
From the several steps of these two great generals, it was
easy to perceive that they were meditating some mighty design
which they had always in view, and laid their schemes at a
great distance for the putting it in execution. The Romans
were sensible of this, and reproached themselves for their
indolence and torpor, which had thrown them into a kind of
lethargy; at a time that the enemy were rapidly pursuing their
victories in Spain, which might one day be turned against
them. They would have been very well pleased to attack
them by open force, and to wrest their conquests out of their
hands; but the fear of another (not less formidable) enemy,
the Gauls, whom they expected shortly to see at their very
gates, kept them from showing their resentment. They therefore
had recourse to negotiations; and concluded a treaty
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
with Asdrubal, in which, without taking any notice of the rest
of Spain, they contented themselves with introducing an article,
by which the Carthaginians were not allowed to make any
conquests beyond the Iberus.
</p>

<p>
Asdrubal, in the mean time, still pushed on his conquests;<note place='foot'>Polyb.
l. ii. p. 123. Liv. l. xxi. n. 2.</note>
still, however, taking care not to pass beyond the limits stipulated
by the treaty; but by sparing no endeavours to win the
chiefs of the several nations by a courteous and engaging
behaviour, he furthered the interests of Carthage still more by
persuasive methods than force of arms. But unhappily, after
having governed Spain eight years, he was treacherously murdered
by a Gaul, who took so barbarous a revenge for a private
grudge he bore him.<note place='foot'>The murder
was an effect of the extraordinary fidelity of this Gaul, whose
master had fallen by the hand of Asdrubal. It was perpetrated in public; and the
murderer being seized by the guards, and put to the torture, expressed so strong a
satisfaction in the thoughts of his having executed his revenge so successfully, that
he seemed to ridicule all the terror of his torments. Eo fuit habitu oris, ut superante
lætitià dolores, ridentis etiam speciem præbuerit. Liv. l. xxi. n. 1.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3783. A. Rom. 530.</note>
Three years before his death, he had written to Carthage,
to desire that Hannibal, then twenty-two years of
age, might be sent to him.<note place='foot'>Liv.
l. xxi. n. 3, 4.</note> The proposal met with
some difficulty, as the senate was divided betwixt
two powerful factions, which, from Hamilcar's time, had began
to follow opposite views in the administration and affairs of
the state. One faction was headed by Hanno, whose birth,
merit, and zeal for the public welfare, gave him great influence
in the public deliberations. This faction proposed, on every
occasion, the concluding of a safe peace, and the preserving
the conquests in Spain, as being preferable to the uncertain
events of an expensive war, which they foresaw would one day
occasion the ruin of Carthage. The other, called the Barcinian
faction, because it supported the interests of Barca and
his family, had, to the credit and influence which it had long
enjoyed in the city, added the reputation which the signal exploits
of Hamilcar and Asdrubal had given it; and declared
openly for war. When therefore Asdrubal's demand came to
be debated in the senate, Hanno represented the danger of
sending so early into the field a young man, who already possessed
all the haughtiness and imperious temper of his father;
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
and who ought, therefore, rather to be kept a long time, and
very carefully, under the eye of the magistrates and the power
of the laws, that he might learn obedience, and a modesty
which should teach him not to think himself superior to all
other men. He concluded with saying, that he feared this
spark, which was then kindling, would one day rise to a conflagration.
His remonstrances were not heard, so that the
Barcinian faction had the superiority, and Hannibal set out
for Spain.
</p>

<p>
The moment of his arrival there, he drew upon himself the
eyes of the whole army, who fancied they saw Hamilcar his
father revive in him. He seemed to dart the same fire from
his eyes; the same martial vigour displayed itself in the air of
his countenance, with the same features and engaging carriage.
But his personal qualities endeared him still more. He possessed
almost every talent that constitutes the great man. His
patience in labour was invincible, his temperance was surprising,
his courage in the greatest dangers intrepid, and his
presence of mind in the heat of battle admirable; and, a still
more wonderful circumstance, his disposition and cast of mind
were so flexible, that nature had formed him equally for commanding
or obeying; so that it was doubtful whether he was
dearer to the soldiers or the generals. He served three campaigns
under Asdrubal.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3784. A. Carth. 626. A. Rom. 528.</note>
Upon the death of that general, the suffrages of both the
army and people concurred in raising Hannibal
to the supreme command.<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. iii. p. 168,
169. Liv. l. xxi. n. 3-5.</note> I know not whether it
was not even then, or about that time, that the
republic, to heighten his influence and authority,
appointed him one of its Suffetes, the first dignity of the
state, which was sometimes conferred upon generals. It is
from Cornelius Nepos<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>In vit.
Annib.</hi> c. 7.</note> that we have borrowed this circumstance
of his life, who, speaking of the prætorship bestowed on
Hannibal, upon his return to Carthage, and the conclusion of
the peace, says, that this was twenty-two years after he had
been nominated king.<note place='foot'>Hic, ut rediit, Prætor
factus est, postquam rex fuerat anno secundo et vigesimo.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
The moment he was created general, Hannibal, as if Italy
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
had been allotted to him, and he had even then been appointed
to make war upon the Romans, turned secretly his whole views
on that side; and lost no time, for fear of being prevented by
death, as his father and brother-in-law had been. In Spain
he took several strong towns, and conquered many nations:
and although the Spaniards greatly exceeded him in the number
of forces, (their army amounting to upwards of a hundred
thousand men,) yet he chose his time and posts so judiciously,
that he entirely defeated them. After this victory, every
thing submitted to his arms. But he still forbore laying siege
to Saguntum,<note place='foot'>This city lay
on the Carthaginian side of the Iberus, very near the mouth of
that river, and in a country where the Carthaginians were allowed to make war,
but Saguntum, as an ally of the Romans, was excepted from all hostilities, by
virtue of the late treaty.&mdash;Trans.</note> carefully avoiding every occasion of a
rupture with the Romans, till he should have taken every step which
he judged necessary for so important an enterprise, pursuant
to the advice given him by his father. He applied himself
particularly to engage the affections of the citizens and allies,
and to gain their confidence, by generously allotting them a
large share of the plunder taken from the enemy, and by scrupulously
paying them all their arrears:<note place='foot'>Ibi largè
partiendo prædam, stipendia præterita cum fide exsolvendo, cunctos civium sociorumque
animos in se firmavit. Liv. l xxi. n. 5.&mdash;Trans.</note> a wise step, which
never fails of producing its advantage at a proper season.
</p>

<p>
The Saguntines, on their side, sensible of the danger with
which they were threatened, informed the Romans of the
progress of Hannibal's conquests.<note place='foot'>Polyb.
l. iii. p. 170-173. Liv. l. xxi. n. 6-15.</note> Upon this, deputies were
nominated by the latter, and ordered to go and acquaint themselves
with the state of affairs upon the spot; they commanded
them also to lay their complaints before Hannibal, if it should
be thought proper; and in case he should refuse to do justice,
that then they should go directly to Carthage, and make the
same complaints.
</p>

<p>
In the mean time Hannibal laid siege to Saguntum, foreseeing
that great advantages would accrue from the taking of this
city. He was persuaded, that this would deprive the Romans
of all hopes of carrying on the war in Spain; that this new
conquest would secure those he had already made; that as no
enemy would be left behind him, his march would be more
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
secure and unmolested; that he should find money enough in
it for the execution of his designs; that the plunder of the
city would inspire his soldiers with greater ardour, and make
them follow him with greater cheerfulness; that, lastly, the
spoils which he should send to Carthage, would gain him the
favour of the citizens. Animated by these motives, he carried
on the siege with the utmost vigour. He himself set an example
to his troops, was present at all the works, and exposed
himself to the greatest dangers.
</p>

<p>
News was soon carried to Rome that Saguntum was besieged.
But the Romans, instead of flying to its relief, lost
their time in fruitless debates, and in deputations equally
fruitless. Hannibal sent word to the Roman deputies, that he
was not at leisure to hear them; they therefore repaired to
Carthage, but met with no better reception, the Barcinian
faction having prevailed over the complaints of the Romans,
and all the remonstrances of Hanno.
</p>

<p>
During all these voyages and negotiations, the siege was
carried on with great vigour. The Saguntines were now reduced
to the last extremity, and in want of all things. An
accommodation was thereupon proposed; but the conditions
on which it was offered appeared so harsh, that the Saguntines
could not prevail upon themselves to accept them.
Before they gave their final answer, the principal senators,
bringing their gold and silver, and that of the public treasury,
into the market-place, threw both into a fire lighted for that
purpose, and afterwards rushed headlong into it themselves.
At the same time, a tower, which had been long assaulted by the
battering rams, falling with a dreadful noise, the Carthaginians
entered the city by the breach, soon made themselves masters
of it, and cut to pieces all the inhabitants who were of age
to bear arms. But notwithstanding the fire, the Carthaginians
got a very great booty. Hannibal did not reserve to himself
any part of the spoils gained by his victories, but applied them
solely to the carrying on his enterprises. Accordingly, Polybius
remarks, that the taking of Saguntum was of service to
him, as it awakened the ardour of his soldiers, by the sight of
the rich booty which they had just obtained, and by the hopes
of more; and it reconciled all the principal persons of Carthage
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
to Hannibal, by the large presents he made to them out
of the spoils.
</p>

<p>
Words could never express the grief and consternation
with which the melancholy news of the capture and cruel fate
of Saguntum was received at Rome.<note place='foot'>Polyb. p.
174, 175. Liv. l. xxi. n. 16, 17.</note> Compassion for this
unfortunate city, shame for having failed to succour such faithful
allies, a just indignation against the Carthaginians, the
authors of all these calamities; a strong alarm raised by the
successes of Hannibal, whom the Romans fancied they saw
already at their gates; all these sentiments caused so violent
an emotion, that during the first moments of their agitation,
the Romans were unable to come to any resolution, or do any
thing but give way to the torrent of their passion, and sacrifice
floods of tears to the memory of a city which fell the victim
of its inviolable fidelity<note place='foot'>Sanctitate disciplinæ,
quâ fidem socialem usque ad perniciem suam coluerunt. Liv. l.
xxi. n. 7.&mdash;Trans.</note> to the Romans, and had been betrayed
by their unaccountable indolence and imprudent delays.
When they were a little recovered, an assembly of the people
was called, and war was decreed unanimously against the
Carthaginians.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>War proclaimed.</hi>&mdash;That no ceremony might be wanting,
deputies were sent to Carthage, to inquire whether Saguntum
had been besieged by order of the republic, and if so, to
declare war; or, in case this siege had been undertaken solely
by the authority of Hannibal, to require that he should be
delivered up to the Romans.<note place='foot'>Polyb. p. 187.
Liv. l. xxi. n. 18, 19.</note> The deputies perceiving that the
senate gave no direct answer to their demands, one of them
taking up the folded lappet of his robe, <q>I bring here,</q> says he,
in a haughty tone, <q>either peace or war; the choice is left to
yourselves.</q> The senate answering, that they left the choice to
him: <q>I give you war then,</q> says he, unfolding his robe. <q>And
we,</q> replied the Carthaginians, with the same haughtiness, <q>as
heartily accept it, and are resolved to prosecute it with the
same cheerfulness.</q> Such was the beginning of the second
Punic war.
</p>

<p>
If the cause of this war should be ascribed to the taking
of Saguntum, the whole blame, says Polybius,<note place='foot'>Polyb.
l. iii. p. 184, 185.</note> lies upon the
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
Carthaginians, who could not, with any colourable pretence,
besiege a city that was in alliance with Rome, and, as such,
comprehended in the treaty, which forbade either party to
make war upon the allies of the other. But, should the origin
of this war be traced higher, and carried back to the time when
the Carthaginians were dispossessed of Sardinia by the Romans,
and a new tribute was so unreasonably imposed on them; it
must be confessed, continues Polybius, that the conduct of the
Romans is entirely unjustifiable on these two points, as being
founded merely on violence and injustice; and that, had the
Carthaginians, without having recourse to ambiguous and
frivolous pretences, plainly demanded satisfaction upon these
two grievances, and, upon their being refused it, had declared
war against Rome, in that case, reason and justice had been
entirely on their side.
</p>

<p>
The interval between the conclusion of the first, and the
beginning of the second Punic war, was twenty-four years.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3787. A. Carth. 629. A. Rom. 531. Ant. J.C. 217.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>The Beginning of the Second Punic War.</hi>&mdash;When war was
resolved upon, and proclaimed on both sides, Hannibal,
who then was twenty-six or twenty-seven years
of age, before he discovered his grand design, thought
it incumbent on him to provide for the security of
Spain and Africa.<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. iii.
p. 187. Liv. l. xxi. n. 21, 22.</note> With this view, he marched the
forces out of the one into the other, so that the Africans
served in Spain and the Spaniards in Africa. He was prompted
to this from a persuasion, that these soldiers, being thus at a
distance from their respective countries, would be fitter for
service; and more firmly attached to him, as they would be a
kind of hostages for each other's fidelity. The forces which he
left in Africa amounted to about forty thousand men, twelve
hundred whereof were cavalry. Those of Spain were something
above fifteen thousand, of which two thousand five hundred
and fifty were horse. He left the command of the Spanish
forces to his brother Asdrubal, with a fleet of about sixty ships
to guard the coasts; and, at the same time, gave him the wisest
directions for his conduct, whether with regard to the Spaniards
or the Romans, in case they should attack him.
</p>

<p>
Livy observes, that Hannibal, before he set forward on this
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
expedition, went to Cadiz to discharge some vows which he
had made to Hercules; and that he engaged himself by new
ones, in order to obtain success in the war he was entering
upon. Polybius gives us,<note place='foot'>Lib. iii. p.
192, 193.</note> in few words, a very clear idea of
the distance of the several places through which Hannibal was
to march in his way to Italy. From New Carthage, whence
he set out to the Iberus, were computed two thousand two
hundred furlongs.<note place='foot'>275 miles.</note><note place='foot'>Polybius
makes the distance from New Carthage to be 2600 furlongs; consequently,
the whole number of furlongs will be 8400, or (allowing 625 feet to the
furlong) 944 English miles, and almost one-third. See Polybius,
edit. Gronov. p. 267.&mdash;Trans.</note> From the Iberus to Emporium, a small
maritime town, which separates Spain from the Gauls, according
to Strabo,<note place='foot'>Lib. iii. p. 199.</note> were
sixteen hundred furlongs.<note place='foot'>200 miles.</note> From Emporium
to the pass of the Rhone, the like space of sixteen hundred
furlongs.<note place='foot'>200 miles.</note> From the pass of the Rhone to the Alps,
fourteen hundred furlongs.<note place='foot'>175 miles.</note> From the Alps to the
plains of Italy, twelve hundred furlongs.<note place='foot'>150 miles.</note>
Thus from New Carthage to the plains of Italy, were eight thousand
furlongs.<note place='foot'>1000 miles.</note>
</p>

<p>
Hannibal had long before taken the prudent precaution of
acquainting himself with the nature and situation of the places
through which he was to pass;<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. iii.
p. 188, 189.</note> of sounding how the Gauls
stood affected to the Romans; of winning over their chiefs,
whom he knew to be very greedy of gold, by his bounty to
them;<note place='foot'>Audierunt præoccupatos jam
ab Annibale Gallorum animos esse: sed ne illi
quidem ipsi satis mitem gentem fore, ni subinde anro, cujus avidissima
gens est, principum animi concilientur. Liv. l. xxi. n.
20.&mdash;Trans.</note> and of securing to himself the affection and fidelity
of one part of the nations through whose country his march lay.
He was not ignorant that the passage of the Alps would be
attended with great difficulties; but he knew they were not
unsurmountable, and that was enough for his purpose.
</p>

<p>
Hannibal began his march early in the spring, from New
Carthage, where he had wintered.<note place='foot'>Polyb. p.
189, 190. Liv. l. xxi. n. 22-24.</note> His army then consisted
of above a hundred thousand men, of which twelve thousand
were cavalry, and he had near forty elephants. Having crossed
the Iberus, he soon subdued the several nations which opposed
him in his march; and lost a considerable part of his army in
this expedition. He left Hanno to command all the country
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
lying between the Iberus and the Pyrenean hills, with eleven
thousand men, who were appointed to guard the baggage of
those that were to follow him. He dismissed the like number,
sending them back to their respective countries; thus securing
to himself their affection when he should want recruits, and
affording to the rest a sure hope that they should be allowed
to return whenever they should desire it. He passed the
Pyrenean hills, and advanced as far as the banks of the Rhone,
at the head of fifty thousand foot, and nine thousand horse;
a formidable army, but less so from the number than from the
valour of the troops that composed it; troops who had served
several years in Spain, and learned the art of war, under the
ablest captains that Carthage could ever boast.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Passage of the Rhone.</hi>&mdash;Hannibal, being arrived within
about four days' march from the mouth of the Rhone,<note place='foot'>A little
above Avignon.&mdash;Trans.</note> attempted
to cross it, because the river in this place took up only
the breadth of its channel.<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. iii.
p. 270-274. edit. Gronov. Liv. l. xxi. ii. 26-28.</note> He bought up all
the ship-boats and little vessels he could meet with, of which the inhabitants
had a great number, because of their commerce. He likewise
built, with great diligence, a prodigious number of boats, little
vessels, and rafts. On his arrival, he found the Gauls encamped
on the opposite bank, and prepared to dispute the passage.
There was no possibility of his attacking them in front. He
therefore ordered a considerable detachment of his forces,
under the command of Hanno, the son of Bomilcar, to pass
the river higher up; and in order to conceal his march, and
the design he had in view, from the enemy, he obliged them to
set out in the night. All things succeeded as he had planned;
and they passed the river<note place='foot'>It is thought this was betwixt
Roquemaure and Pont St. Esprit.&mdash;Trans.</note> the next day without the least
opposition.
</p>

<p>
They passed the rest of the day in refreshing themselves,
and in the night they advanced silently towards the enemy.
In the morning, when the signals agreed upon had been given,
Hannibal prepared to attempt the passage. Part of his horses,
completely harnessed, were put into boats, that their riders
might, on landing, immediately charge the enemy. The rest
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
of the horses swam over on both sides of the boats, from which
one single man held the bridles of three or four. The infantry
crossed the river, either on rafts, or in small boats, and in a
kind of gondolas, which were only the trunks of trees, which
they themselves had made hollow. The great boats were drawn
up in a line at the top of the channel, in order to break the
force of the waves, and facilitate the passage to the rest of the
small fleet. When the Gauls saw it advancing on the river,
they, according to their custom, uttered dreadful cries and
howlings; and clashing their bucklers over their heads, one
against the other, let fly a shower of darts. But they were
prodigiously astonished, when they heard a great noise behind
them, perceived their tents on fire, and saw themselves attacked
both in front and rear. They now had no way left to save
themselves but by flight, and accordingly retreated to their
respective villages. After this, the rest of the troops crossed
the river quietly, and without any opposition.
</p>

<p>
The elephants alone occasioned a great deal of trouble.
They were wafted over the next day in the following manner.
From the bank of the river was thrown a raft, two hundred
feet in length, and fifty in breadth; this was fixed strongly to
the banks by large ropes, and quite covered over with earth;
so that the elephants, deceived by its appearance, thought
themselves upon firm ground. From this first raft they proceeded
to a second, which was built in the same form, but
only a hundred feet long, and fastened to the former by chains
that were easily loosened. The female elephants were put
upon the first raft, and the males followed after; and when
they were got upon the second raft, it was loosened from the
first, and, by the help of small boats, towed to the opposite
shore. After this, it was sent back to fetch those which were
behind. Some fell into the water, but they at last got safe to
shore, and not a single elephant was drowned.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The March after the Battle of the Rhone.</hi>&mdash;The two Roman
consuls had, in the beginning of the spring, set out for their
respective provinces;<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. iii. p. 200-202, &amp;c.
Liv. l. xxi. n. 31, 32.</note> P. Scipio for Spain with sixty ships, two
Roman legions, fourteen thousand foot, and twelve hundred
horse of the allies; Tiberius Sempronius for Sicily, with a
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
hundred and sixty ships, two legions, sixteen thousand foot,
and eighteen hundred horse of the allies. The Roman legion
consisted, at that time, of four thousand foot and three hundred
horse. Sempronius had made extraordinary preparations
at Lilybæum, a seaport town in Sicily, with the design of
crossing over directly into Africa. Scipio was equally confident
that he should find Hannibal still in Spain, and make that
country the seat of war. But he was greatly astonished, when,
on his arrival at Marseilles, advice was brought him, that
Hannibal was upon the banks of the Rhone, and preparing to
cross it. He then detached three hundred horse, to view the
posture of the enemy; and Hannibal detached five hundred
Numidian horse for the same purpose; during which, some of
his soldiers were employed in wafting over the elephants.
</p>

<p>
At the same time he gave audience, in the presence of his
whole army, to one of the princes of that part of Gaul which is
situated near the Po, who assured him, by an interpreter, in
the name of his subjects, that his arrival was impatiently
expected; that the Gauls were ready to join him, and march
against the Romans, and he himself offered to conduct his
army through places where they should meet with a plentiful
supply of provisions. When the prince was withdrawn, Hannibal,
in a speech to his troops, magnified extremely this deputation
from the Gauls; extolled, with just praises, the bravery
which his forces had shown hitherto; and exhorted them to
sustain, to the last, their reputation and glory. The soldiers
inspired with fresh ardour and courage, all at once raised their
hands, and declared their readiness to follow whithersoever he
should lead the way. Accordingly, he appointed the next day
for his march; and, after offering up vows, and making supplications
to the gods for the safety of his troops, he dismissed
them; desiring, at the same time, that they would take the
necessary refreshments.
</p>

<p>
Whilst this was doing, the Numidians returned. They had
met with, and charged, the Roman detachment: the conflict
was very obstinate, and the slaughter great, considering the
small number of the combatants. A hundred and sixty of the
Romans were left dead upon the spot, and more than two hundred
of their enemies. But the honour of this skirmish fell to
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
the Romans; the Numidians having retired and left them the
field of battle. This first action was interpreted as an omen<note place='foot'>Hoc
principium simulque omen belli, ut summâ rerum prosperum eventum,
ita haud sanè incruentam ancipitisque certaminis victoriam Romanis portendit. Liv.
l. xxi. n. 29.&mdash;Trans.</note>
of the fate of the whole war, and seemed to promise success
to the Romans, but which, at the same time, would be dearly
bought, and strongly contested. On both sides, those who
had survived this engagement, and who had been engaged in
reconnoitring, returned to inform their respective generals of
what they had discovered.
</p>

<p>
Hannibal, as he had declared, decamped the next day, and
crossed through the midst of Gaul, advancing northward; not
that this was the shortest way to the Alps, but only, as by
leading him from the sea, it prevented his meeting Scipio;
and, by that means, favoured the design he had, of marching
all his forces into Italy, without having weakened them by a
battle.
</p>

<p>
Though Scipio marched with the utmost expedition, he did
not reach the place where Hannibal had passed the Rhone,
till three days after he had set out from it. Despairing therefore
to overtake him, he returned to his fleet, and reimbarked,
fully resolved to wait for Hannibal at the foot of the Alps.
But, in order that he might not leave Spain defenceless, he
sent his brother Cneius thither, with the greatest part of his
army, to make head against Asdrubal; and himself set forward
immediately for Genoa, with intention to oppose the army
which was in Gaul, near the Po, to that of Hannibal.
</p>

<p>
The latter, after four days' march, arrived at a kind of
island, formed by the conflux<note place='foot'>The text of Polybius,
as it has been transmitted to us, and that of Livy, place
this island at the meeting of the Saone and the Rhone, that is, in that part where
the city of Lyons stands. But this is a manifest error. It was Σκώρας in the Greek,
instead of which ὁ Ἄραρος has been substituted. J. Gronovius says, that he had
read, in a manuscript of Livy, <hi rend='italic'>Bisarar</hi>, which shows, that
we are to read <emph>Isara Rhodanusque amnes</emph>, instead of <emph>Arar
Rhodanusque</emph>; and, that the island in question is formed by the conflux
of the Isere and the Rhone. The situation of the Allobroges, here spoken of,
proves this evidently.&mdash;Trans.</note> of two rivers, which unite their
streams in this place. Here he was chosen umpire between
two brothers, who disputed their right to the kingdom. He
to whom Hannibal decreed it, furnished his whole army with
provisions, clothes, and arms. This was the country of the
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
Allobroges, by which name the people were called, who now
inhabit the district of Geneva,<note place='foot'>In
Dauphiné.&mdash;Trans.</note> Vienne, and Grenoble. His
march was not much interrupted till he arrived at the Durance,
and from thence he reached the foot of the Alps without any
opposition.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Passage of the Alps.</hi>&mdash;The sight of these mountains,
whose tops seemed to touch the skies, and were covered with
snow, and where nothing appeared to the eye but a few pitiful
cottages, scattered here and there, on the sharp tops of inaccessible
rocks; nothing but meagre flocks, almost perished
with cold, and hairy men of a savage and fierce aspect; this
spectacle, I say, renewed the terror which the distant prospect
had raised, and chilled with fear the hearts of the soldiers.<note place='foot'>Polyb.
l. iii. p. 203-208. Liv. l. xxi. n. 32-37.</note>
When they began to climb up, they perceived the mountaineers,
who had seized upon the highest cliffs, and were prepared
to oppose their passage. They therefore were forced to
halt. Had the mountaineers, says Polybius, only lain in
ambuscade, and after having suffered Hannibal's troops to
entangle themselves in some difficult passage, had then charged
them on a sudden, the Carthaginian army would have been
irrecoverably lost. Hannibal, being informed that they kept
those posts only in the daytime, and quitted them in the
evening, possessed himself of them by night. The Gauls
returning early in the morning, were very much surprised to
find their posts in the enemy's hand: but still they were not
disheartened. Being used to climb up those rocks, they attacked
the Carthaginians who were upon their march, and
harassed them on all sides. The latter were obliged, at one
and the same time, to engage with the enemy, and struggle
with the ruggedness of the paths of the mountains, where they
could hardly stand. But the greatest disorder was caused by
the horses and beasts of burden laden with the baggage; who
being frighted by the cries and howling of the Gauls, which
echoed dreadfully among the mountains, and being sometimes
wounded by the mountaineers, came tumbling on the soldiers,
and dragged them headlong with them down the precipices
which skirted the road. Hannibal, being sensible that the
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
loss of his baggage alone was enough to destroy his army, ran
to the assistance of his troops, who were thus embarrassed;
and having put the enemy to flight, continued his march
without molestation or danger, and came to a castle, which
was the most important fortress in the whole country. He
possessed himself of it, and of all the neighbouring villages, in
which he found a large quantity of corn, and cattle sufficient
to subsist his army three days.
</p>

<p>
After a pretty quiet march, the Carthaginians were to encounter
a new danger. The Gauls, feigning to take advantage
of the misfortunes of their neighbours, who had suffered for
opposing the passage of Hannibal's troops, came to pay their
respects to that general, brought him provisions, offered to be
his guides; and left him hostages, as pledges of their fidelity.
However, Hannibal placed no great confidence in them. The
elephants and horses marched in the front, whilst himself followed
with the main body of his foot, keeping a vigilant eye
over all. They came at length to a very narrow and rugged
pass, which was commanded by an eminence where the Gauls
had placed an ambuscade. These rushing out on a sudden,
assailed the Carthaginians on every side, rolling down stones
upon them of a prodigious size. The army would have been
entirely routed, had not Hannibal exerted himself in an extraordinary
manner to extricate them out of this difficulty.
</p>

<p>
At last, on the ninth day, they reached the summit of the
Alps. Here the army halted two days, to rest and refresh
themselves after their fatigue, after which they continued their
march. As it was now autumn, a great quantity of snow had
lately fallen, and covered all the roads, which caused a consternation
among the troops, and disheartened them very
much. Hannibal perceived it, and halting on a hill from
whence there was a prospect of all Italy, he showed them the
fruitful plains<note place='foot'>Of Piedmont.&mdash;Trans.</note>
watered by the river Po, to which they were
almost come; adding, that they had but one effort more to
make, before they arrived at them. He represented to them,
that a battle or two would put a glorious period to their toils,
and enrich them for ever, by giving them possession of the
capital of the Roman empire. This speech, filled with such
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
pleasing hopes, and enforced by the sight of Italy, inspired the
dejected soldiers with fresh vigour and alacrity. They therefore
pursued their march. But still the road was more craggy
and troublesome than ever; and as they were now on a descent,
the difficulty and danger increased. For the ways were
narrow, steep, and slippery, in most places; so that the soldiers
could neither keep upon their feet as they marched, nor
recover themselves when they made a false step, but stumbled,
and beat down one another.
</p>

<p>
They were now come to a worse place than any they had
yet met with. This was a path naturally very rugged and
craggy, which having been made more so by the late falling in
of the earth, terminated in a frightful precipice above a thousand
feet deep. Here the cavalry stopped short. Hannibal,
wondering at this sudden halt, ran to the place, and saw that
it really would be impossible for the troops to advance. He
therefore was for making a circuitous route, but this also was
found impracticable. As, upon the old snow, which was
grown hard by lying, there was some newly fallen that was of
no great depth, the feet, at first, by their sinking into it, found
a firm support; but this snow being soon dissolved, by the
treading of the foremost troops and beasts of burden, the soldiers
marched on nothing but ice, which was so slippery, that
they had no firm footing; and where, if they made the least
false step, or endeavoured to save themselves with their hands
or knees, there were no boughs or roots to catch hold of.
Besides this difficulty, the horses, striking their feet forcibly
into the ice to keep themselves from falling, could not draw
them out again, but were caught as in a gin. They therefore
were forced to seek some other expedient.
</p>

<p>
Hannibal resolved to pitch his camp, and to give his troops
some days' rest on the summit of this hill, which was of a
considerable extent; after they should have cleared the ground,
and removed all the old as well as the new fallen snow, which
was a work of immense labour. He afterwards ordered a
path to be cut into the rock itself, and this was carried on
with amazing patience and ardour. To open and enlarge this
path, all the trees thereabouts were cut down, and piled round
the rock; after which fire was set to them. The wind, by
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
good fortune, blowing hard, a fierce flame soon broke out, so
that the rock glowed like the very coals with which it was surrounded.
Then Hannibal, if Livy may be credited, (for Polybius
says nothing of this matter,) caused a great quantity of
vinegar to be poured on the rock,<note place='foot'>Many reject this
incident as fictitious. Pliny takes notice of a remarkable quality in
vinegar; <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> its being able to break rocks and stones. Saxa
rumpit infusum, quæ non ruperit ignis antecedens, l. xxiii. c. 1. He therefore calls it,
Succus rerum domitor, l. xxxiii. c 2. Dion, speaking of the siege of Eleutheræ,
says, that the walls of it were made to fall by the force of vinegar, l. xxxvi. p. 8.
Probably, the circumstance that seems improbable on this occasion, is, the difficulty
of Hannibal's procuring, in those mountains, a quantity of vinegar sufficient for this
purpose.&mdash;Trans.</note> which piercing into the
veins of it, that were now cracked by the intense heat of the
fire, calcined and softened it. In this manner, taking a large
compass about, in order that the descent might be easier, they
cut away along the rock, which opened a free passage to the
forces, the baggage, and even to the elephants. Four days
were employed in this work, during which the beasts of burden
were dying with hunger; there being no food for them on
these mountains buried under eternal snows. At last they
came into cultivated and fruitful spots, which yielded plenty
of forage for the horses, and all kinds of food for the soldiers.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hannibal enters Italy.</hi>&mdash;When Hannibal entered into
Italy, his army was not near so numerous as when he left
Spain, where we have seen it amounted to near sixty thousand
men.<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. iii. p. 209 &amp; 212-214. Liv.
l. xxi. c. 39.</note> It had sustained great losses during the march, either in
the battles it was forced to fight, or in the passage of rivers. At
his departure from the Rhone, it still consisted of thirty-eight
thousand foot, and above eight thousand horse. The march
over the Alps destroyed near half this number; so that Hannibal
had now remaining only twelve thousand Africans, eight
thousand Spanish foot, and six thousand horse. This account
he himself caused to be engraved on a pillar near the promontory
called Lacinium. It was five months and a half since his
first setting out from New Carthage, including the fortnight he
employed in marching over the Alps, when he set up his standards
in the plains of the Po, at the entrance of Piedmont. It
might then be September.
</p>

<p>
His first care was to give his troops some rest, which they
very much wanted. When he perceived that they were fit for
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
action, the inhabitants of the territories of
Turin<note place='foot'>Taurini.&mdash;Trans.</note> refusing to
conclude an alliance with him, he marched and encamped
before their chief city; carried it in three days, and put all who
had opposed him to the sword. This expedition struck the
barbarians with so much dread, that they all came voluntarily,
and surrendered at discretion. The rest of the Gauls would
have done the same, had they not been awed by the terror of
the Roman arms, which were now approaching. Hannibal
thought therefore that he had no time to lose; that it was his
interest to march up into the country, and attempt some great
exploit; such as might inspire those who should have an
inclination to join him with confidence.
</p>

<p>
The rapid progress which Hannibal had made, greatly
alarmed Rome, and caused the utmost consternation throughout
the city. Sempronius was ordered to leave Sicily, and
hasten to the relief of his country; and P. Scipio, the other
consul, advanced by forced marches towards the enemy, crossed
the Po, and pitched his camp near the Ticinus.<note place='foot'>A small
river (now called Tesino) in Lombardy.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Battle of the Cavalry near the Ticinus.</hi>&mdash;The armies
being now in sight, the generals on each side made a speech
to their soldiers before they engaged.<note place='foot'>Polyb. l.
iii. p. 214-218. Liv. l. xxi. n. 39-47.</note> Scipio, after having
represented to his forces the glory of their country, the achievements
of their ancestors, observed to them, that victory was in
their hands, since they were to combat only with Carthaginians,
a people who had been so often defeated by them, as
well as forced to be their tributaries for twenty years, and long
accustomed to be almost their slaves: that the advantage they
had gained over the flower of the Carthaginian horse, was a
sure omen of their success during the rest of the war: that
Hannibal, in his march over the Alps, had just before lost the
best part of his army; and that those who survived were exhausted
by hunger, cold, and fatigue: that the bare sight of
the Romans was sufficient to put to flight a parcel of soldiers,
who had the aspects of ghosts rather than of men: in a word,
that victory was become necessary, not only to secure Italy,
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
but to save Rome itself, whose fate the present battle would
decide, as that city had no other army wherewith to oppose the
enemy.
</p>

<p>
Hannibal, that his words might make the stronger impression
on the rude minds of his soldiers, speaks to their eyes,
before he addresses their ears; and does not attempt to persuade
them by arguments, till he has first moved them by the
following spectacle. He arms some of the prisoners whom he
had taken in the mountains, and obliges them to fight, two
and two, in sight of his army; promising to reward the conquerors
with their liberty and rich presents. The alacrity
wherewith these barbarians engaged upon these motives, gives
Hannibal an occasion of exhibiting to his soldiers a lively
image of their present condition; which, by depriving them of
all means of returning back, puts them under an absolute
necessity either of conquering or dying, in order to avoid the
endless evils prepared for those that should be so base and
cowardly as to submit to the Romans. He displays to them
the greatness of their reward, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> the conquest of all Italy;
the plunder of the rich and wealthy city of Rome; an illustrious
victory, and immortal glory. He speaks contemptibly
of the Roman power, the false lustre of which (he observed)
ought not to dazzle such warriors as themselves, who had
marched from the pillars of Hercules, through the fiercest
nations, into the very centre of Italy. As for his own part, he
scorns to compare himself with Scipio, a general of but six
months' standing: himself, who was almost born, at least
brought up, in the tent of Hamilcar his father; the conqueror
of Spain, of Gaul, of the inhabitants of the Alps, and what is
still more, conqueror of the Alps themselves. He rouses their
indignation against the insolence of the Romans, who had dared
to demand that himself, and the rest who had taken Saguntum,
should be delivered up to them; and excites their jealousy
against the intolerable pride of those imperious masters, who
imagined that all things ought to obey them, and that they had
a right to give laws to the whole world.
</p>

<p>
After these speeches, both sides prepare for battle. Scipio,
having thrown a bridge across the Ticinus, marched his troops
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
over it. Two ill omens<note place='foot'>These two ill omens were,
first, a wolf had stolen into the camp of the Romans, and cruelly
mangled some of the soldiers, without receiving the least harm from
those who endeavoured to kill it: and secondly, a swarm of bees had pitched upon a
tree near the Prætorium or general's tent. Liv. l. xxi. c. 46.&mdash;Trans.</note>
had filled his army with consternation
and dread. As for the Carthaginians, they were inspired
with the boldest courage. Hannibal animates them with fresh
promises; and cleaving with a stone the skull of the lamb he
was sacrificing, he prays Jupiter to dash to pieces his head in
like manner, in case he did not give his soldiers the rewards he
had promised them.
</p>

<p>
Scipio posts, in the first line, the troops armed with missive
weapons, and the Gaulish horse; and forming his second line
of the flower of the confederate cavalry, he advances slowly.
Hannibal advanced with his whole cavalry, in the centre of
which he had posted the troopers who rid with bridles, and the
Numidian horsemen on<note place='foot'>The Numidians used to ride without
saddle or bridle.&mdash;Trans.</note> the wings, in order to surround the
enemy. The officers and cavalry being eager to engage, a
charge ensues. At the first onset, Scipio's light-armed soldiers
had scarcely discharged their darts, when, frighted at the
Carthaginian cavalry, which came pouring upon them, and
fearing lest they should be trampled under the horses' feet,
they gave way, and retired through the intervals of the squadrons.
The fight continued a long time with equal success.
Many troopers on both sides dismounted, so that the battle was
carried on between infantry as well as cavalry. In the mean
time, the Numidians surround the enemy, and charge the rear
of the light-armed troops, who at first had escaped the attack
of the cavalry, and tread them under their horses' feet. The
centre of the Roman forces had hitherto fought with great
bravery. Many were killed on both sides, and even more on
that of the Carthaginians. But the Roman troops were put
into disorder by the Numidians, who attacked them in the rear;
and especially by a wound the consul received, which disabled
him from continuing the combat. However, this general was
rescued out of the enemy's hands by the bravery of his son,
then but seventeen years old; and who afterwards was
honoured with the surname of Africanus, for having put a
glorious period to this war.
</p>

<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>

<p>
The consul, though dangerously wounded, retreated in good
order, and was conveyed to his camp by a body of horse, who
covered him with their arms and bodies: the rest of the army
followed him thither. He hastened to the Po, which he crossed
with his army, and then broke down the bridge, whereby he
prevented Hannibal from overtaking him.
</p>

<p>
It is agreed, that Hannibal owed this first victory to his
cavalry; and it was judged from thenceforth that the main
strength of his army consisted in his horse; and therefore,
that it would be proper for the Romans to avoid large open
plains, such as are those between the Po and the Alps.
</p>

<p>
Immediately after the battle of the Ticinus, all the neighbouring
Gauls seemed to contend who should submit themselves
first to Hannibal, furnish him with ammunition, and
enlist in his army. And this, as Polybius has observed, was
what chiefly induced that wise and skilful general, notwithstanding
the small number and weakness of his troops, to
hazard a battle; which he indeed was now obliged to venture,
from the impossibility of marching back whenever he should
desire to do it; because nothing but a battle would oblige the
Gauls to declare for him, whose assistance was the only refuge
he then had left.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Battle of the Trebia.</hi>&mdash;Sempronius the consul, upon the
orders he had received from the senate, was returned from
Sicily to Ariminum.<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. iii. p. 220-227. Liv. l. xxi.
n. 51-56.</note> From thence he marched towards the
Trebia, a small river of Lombardy, which falls into the Po a
little above Placentia, where he joined his forces to those of
Scipio. Hannibal advanced towards the camp of the Romans,
from which he was separated only by that small river. The
armies lying so near one another, gave occasion to frequent
skirmishes, in one of which Sempronius, at the head of a body
of horse, gained some advantage over a party of Carthaginians,
very trifling indeed, but which nevertheless very much increased
the good opinion this general naturally entertained of
his own merit.
</p>

<p>
This inconsiderable success seemed to him a complete victory.
He boasted his having vanquished the enemy in the
same kind of fight in which his colleague had been defeated,
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
and that he thereby had revived the courage of the dejected
Romans. Being now resolutely bent to come, as soon as possible,
to a decisive battle, he thought it proper, for decency's
sake, to consult Scipio, whom he found of a quite different
opinion from himself. Scipio represented, that in case time
should be allowed for disciplining the new levies during the
winter, they would be much fitter for service in the ensuing
campaign; that the Gauls, who were naturally fickle and inconstant,
would disengage themselves insensibly from Hannibal;
that as soon as his wounds should be healed, his presence
might be of some use in an affair of such general concern: in
a word, he besought him earnestly not to proceed any further.
</p>

<p>
These reasons, though so just, made no impression upon
Sempronius. He saw himself at the head of sixteen thousand
Romans, and twenty thousand allies, exclusive of cavalry, (a
number which, in those ages, formed a complete army,) when
both consuls joined their forces. The troops of the enemy
amounted to near the same number. He thought the juncture
extremely favourable for him. He declared publicly, that all
the officers and soldiers were desirous of a battle, except his
colleague, whose mind (he observed) being more affected by
his wound than his body, could not, for that reason, bear to
hear of an engagement. But still, continued Sempronius, is it
just to let the whole army droop and languish with him?
What could Scipio expect more? Did he flatter himself with
the hopes that a third consul, and a new army, would come to
his assistance? Such were the expressions he employed both
among the soldiers, and even about Scipio's tent. The time
for the election of new generals drawing near, Sempronius was
afraid a successor would be sent before he had put an end to
the war; and therefore it was his opinion, that he ought to
take advantage of his colleague's illness, to secure the whole
honour of the victory to himself. As he had no regard, says
Polybius, to the time proper for action, and only to that which
he thought suited his own interest, he could not fail of taking
wrong measures. He therefore ordered his army to prepare
for battle.
</p>

<p>
This was the very thing Hannibal desired; as he held it for
a maxim, that a general who has entered a foreign country, or
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
one possessed by the enemy, and has formed some great
design, has no other refuge left, than continually to raise the
expectations of his allies by some fresh exploits. Besides,
knowing that he should have to deal only with new-levied and
unexperienced troops, he was desirous of taking advantage of
the ardour of the Gauls, who were extremely desirous of fighting;
and of Scipio's absence, who, by reason of his wound,
could not be present in the battle. Mago was therefore ordered
to lie in ambush with two thousand men, consisting of horse
and foot, on the steep banks of a small rivulet which ran between
the two camps, and to conceal himself among the bushes
that were very thick there. An ambuscade is often safer in a
smooth open country, but full of thickets, as this was, than in
woods, because such a spot is less apt to be suspected. He
afterwards caused a detachment of Numidian cavalry to cross
the Trebia with orders to advance at break of day as far as
the very barriers of the enemy's camp, in order to provoke
them to fight; and then to retreat and repass the river, in
order to draw the Romans after them. What he had foreseen,
came directly to pass. The fiery Sempronius immediately
detached his whole cavalry against the Numidians, and then
six thousand light-armed troops, who were soon followed by
all the rest of the army. The Numidians fled designedly;
upon which the Romans pursued them with great eagerness,
and crossed the Trebia without resistance, but not without
great difficulty, being forced to wade up to their very arm-pits
through the rivulet, which was swoln with the torrents that had
fallen in the night from the neighbouring mountains. It was
then about the winter-solstice, that is, in December. It happened
to snow that day, and the cold was excessively piercing.
The Romans had left their camp fasting, and without having
taken the least precaution; whereas the Carthaginians had, by
Hannibal's order, eaten and drunk plentifully in their tents;
had got their horses in readiness, rubbed themselves with oil,
and put on their armour by the fire-side.
</p>

<p>
They were thus prepared when the fight began. The Romans
defended themselves valiantly for a considerable time,
though they were half spent with hunger, fatigue, and cold;
but their cavalry was at last broken and put to flight by that
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
of the Carthaginians, which much exceeded theirs in numbers
and strength. The infantry also were soon in great disorder.
The soldiers in ambuscade sallying out at a proper time, rushed
on a sudden upon their rear, and completed the overthrow.
A body of above ten thousand men resolutely fought their way
through the Gauls and Africans, of whom they made a dreadful
slaughter; but as they could neither assist their friends, nor
return to the camp, the way to it being cut off by the Numidian
horse, the river, and the rain, they retreated in good order to
Placentia. Most of the rest lost their lives on the banks of the
river, being trampled to pieces by the elephants and horses.
Those who escaped, went and joined the body above mentioned.
The next night Scipio retired also to Placentia. The Carthaginians
gained a complete victory, and their loss was inconsiderable,
except that a great number of their horses were
destroyed by the cold, the rain, and the snow; and that, of all
their elephants, they saved but one only.
</p>

<p>
In Spain, the Romans had better success in this and the
following campaign;<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. iii. pp.
228, 229. Liv. l. xxi. n. 60, 61.</note> for Cn. Scipio extended his conquests as
far as the river Iberus,<note place='foot'>Or Ebro.&mdash;Trans.</note>
defeated Hanno, and took him prisoner.
</p>

<p>
Hannibal took the opportunity, whilst he was in winter
quarters, to refresh his troops, and gain the affection of the
natives.<note place='foot'>Polyb. p. 229.</note>
For this purpose, after having declared to the prisoners
whom he had taken from the allies of the Romans, that
he was not come with the view of making war upon them, but
of restoring the Italians to their liberty, and protecting them
against the Romans, he sent them all home to their own countries,
without requiring the least ransom.
</p>

<p>
The winter was no sooner over, than he set out towards
Tuscany,<note place='foot'>Liv. l. xxi. n. 58.</note>
whither he hastened his march for two important
reasons: first, to avoid the ill effects which would arise from
the ill will of the Gauls, who were tired with the long stay of
the Carthaginian army in their territories; and were impatient
of bearing the whole burden of a war, in which they had
engaged with no other view than to carry it into the country of
their common enemy: secondly, that he might increase, by
some bold exploit, the reputation of his arms in the minds of
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
all the inhabitants of Italy, by carrying the war to the very
gates of Rome; and at the same time reanimate his troops,
and the Gauls his allies, by the plunder of the enemy's lands.
But in his march over the Apennines, he was overtaken by a
dreadful storm, which destroyed great numbers of his men.
The cold, the rain, the wind and hail, seemed to conspire his
ruin; so that the fatigues which the Carthaginians had undergone
in crossing the Alps, seemed less dreadful than those they
now suffered. He therefore marched back to Placentia, where
he again fought Sempronius, who was returned from Rome.
The loss on both sides was very nearly equal.
</p>

<p>
Whilst Hannibal was in these winter quarters, he hit upon
a true Carthaginian stratagem.<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. iii. p.
229. Liv. l. xxii. n. 1. Appian. <hi rend='italic'>in Bell. Annib.</hi>
p. 316.</note> He was surrounded with fickle
and inconstant nations: the friendship he had contracted with
them was but of recent date. He had reason to apprehend a
change in their disposition, and, consequently, that attempts
would be made upon his life. To secure himself, therefore,
he got perukes made, and clothes suited to every age. Of
these he sometimes wore one, sometimes another; and disguised
himself so often, that not merely such as saw him only
transiently, but even his intimate acquaintance, could scarce
know him.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3788. A. Rom. 532.</note>
At Rome, Cn. Servilius and C. Flaminius had been appointed
consuls.<note place='foot'>Polyb. pp. 230, 231. Liv. l.
xxii. n. 2.</note> Hannibal having advice that the
latter was advanced already as far as Arretium, a
town of Tuscany, resolved to go and engage him as
soon as possible. Two ways being shown him, he chose the
shortest, though the most troublesome, nay, almost impassable,
by reason of a fen which he was forced to go through. Here
the army suffered incredible hardships. During four days and
three nights they marched halfway up the leg in water, and,
consequently, could not get a moment's sleep. Hannibal himself,
who rode upon the only elephant he had left, could hardly
get through. His long want of sleep, and the thick vapours
which exhaled from that marshy place, together with the
unhealthiness of the season, cost him one of his eyes.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Battle of Thrasymenus.<note place='foot'>Polyb. l.
iii. p. 231-238. Liv. l. xxii. n. 3-8.</note></hi>&mdash;Hannibal being thus got, almost
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
unexpectedly, out of this dangerous situation, and having
refreshed his troops, marched and pitched his camp between
Arretium and Fesulæ, in the richest and most fruitful part of
Tuscany. His first endeavours were, to discover the disposition
of Flaminius, in order that he might take advantage of his
weak side, which, according to Polybius, ought to be the chief
study of a general. He was told, that Flaminius was greatly
conceited of his own merit, bold, enterprising, rash, and fond
of glory. To plunge him the deeper into these excesses, to
which he was naturally prone,<note place='foot'>Apparebat ferociter omnia ac
præpioperè acturum. Quóque pronior esset in sua vitia, agitare eum atque
irritare Pœnus parat. Liv. l. xxii. n. 3.&mdash;Trans.</note> he inflamed his impetuous
spirit, by laying waste and burning the whole country in his sight.
</p>

<p>
Flaminius was not of a temper to continue inactive in his
camp, even if Hannibal had lain still. But when he saw the
territories of his allies laid waste before his eyes, he thought it
would reflect dishonour upon him, should he suffer Hannibal
to ransack Italy without control, and even advance to the very
walls of Rome without meeting any resistance. He rejected
with scorn the prudent counsels of those who advised him to
wait the arrival of his colleague, and to be satisfied, for the
present, with putting a stop to the devastation of the enemy.
</p>

<p>
In the mean time, Hannibal was still advancing towards
Rome, having Cortona on the left hand, and the lake Thrasymenus
on his right. When he saw that the consul followed
close after him, with design to give him battle, in order to stop
him in his march; having observed that the ground was convenient
for an engagement, he thought only of making preparations
for it. The lake Thrasymenus and the mountains of
Cortona form a very narrow defile, which leads into a large
valley, lined on both sides with hills of a considerable height,
and closed, at the outlet, by a steep hill of difficult access.
On this hill, Hannibal, after having crossed the valley, came
and encamped with the main body of his army; posting his
light-armed infantry in ambuscade upon the hills on the right,
and part of his cavalry behind those on the left, as far almost
as the entrance of the defile, through which Flaminius was
obliged to pass. Accordingly, this general, who followed him
very eagerly with the resolution to fight him, being come to
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
the defile near the lake, was forced to halt, because night was
coming on; but he entered it the next morning at daybreak.
</p>

<p>
Hannibal having permitted him to advance, with all his
forces, above half way through the valley, and seeing the Roman
van-guard pretty near him, gave the signal for the battle,
and commanded his troops to come out of their ambuscade,
in order that he might attack the enemy at the same time
from all quarters. The reader may guess at the consternation
with which the Romans were seized.
</p>

<p>
They were not yet drawn up in order of battle, neither had
they got their arms in readiness, when they found themselves
attacked in front, in rear, and in flank. In a moment, all the
ranks were put into disorder. Flaminius, alone undaunted in
so universal a consternation, animates his soldiers both with
his hand and voice, and exhorts them to cut themselves a
passage with their swords through the midst of the enemy.
But the tumult which reigned every where, the dreadful shouts
of the enemy, and a fog that was risen, prevented his being
seen or heard. However, when the Romans saw themselves
surrounded on all sides, either by the enemy or the lake, the
impossibility of saving their lives by flight roused their courage,
and both parties began the fight with astonishing animosity.
Their fury was so great, that not a soldier in either army perceived
an earthquake which happened in that country, and
buried whole cities in ruins. In this confusion, Flaminius
being slain by one of the Insubrian Gauls, the Romans began
to give ground, and at last fairly fled. Great numbers, endeavouring
to save themselves, leaped into the lake; whilst
others, directing their course towards the mountains, fell into
the enemy's hands whom they strove to avoid. Six thousand
only cut their way through the conquerors, and retreated to
a place of safety; but the next day they were taken prisoners.
In this battle fifteen thousand Romans were killed, and about
ten thousand escaped to Rome by different roads. Hannibal
sent back the Latins, who were allies of the Romans, into their
own country, without demanding the least ransom. He commanded
search to be made for the body of Flaminius, in order
to give it burial; but it could not be found. He afterwards
put his troops into quarters of refreshment, and solemnized the
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
funerals of thirty of his chief officers who were killed in the
battle. He lost in all but fifteen hundred men, most of whom
were Gauls.
</p>

<p>
Immediately after, Hannibal despatched a courier to Carthage,
with the news of his good success hitherto in Italy. This
caused the greatest joy for the present, gave birth to the most
promising hopes with regard to the future, and revived the
courage of all the citizens. They now prepared, with incredible
ardour, to send into Italy and Spain all necessary succours.
</p>

<p>
Rome, on the contrary, was filled with universal grief and
alarm, as soon as the prætor had pronounced from the rostra
the following words, <q>We have lost a great battle.</q> The senate,
studious of nothing but the public welfare, thought that in so
great a calamity and so imminent a danger, recourse must be
had to extraordinary remedies. They therefore appointed
Quintus Fabius dictator, a person as conspicuous for his
wisdom as his birth. It was the custom at Rome, that the
moment a dictator was nominated, all authority ceased, that
of the tribunes of the people excepted. M. Minucius was
appointed his general of horse. We are now in the second
year of the war.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hannibal's Conduct with respect to Fabius.<note place='foot'>Polyb.
l. iii. p. 239-255. Liv. l. xxii. n. 9-30.</note></hi>&mdash;Hannibal,
after the battle of Thrasymenus, not thinking it yet proper to
march directly to Rome, contented himself, in the mean time,
with laying waste the country. He crossed Umbria and Picenum;
and after ten days' march, arrived in the territory of
Adria.<note place='foot'>A small town, which gave its name to the
Adriatic sea.&mdash;Trans.</note> He got a very considerable booty in this march.
Out of his implacable enmity to the Romans, he commanded,
that all who were able to bear arms, should be put to the
sword; and meeting no obstacle any where, he advanced as
far as Apulia; plundering the countries which lay in his way,
and carrying desolation wherever he came, in order to compel
the nations to disengage themselves from their alliance with
the Romans; and to show all Italy, that Rome itself, now quite
dispirited, yielded him the victory.
</p>

<p>
Fabius, followed by Minucius and four legions, had marched
from Rome in quest of the enemy, but with a firm resolution
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
not to let him take the least advantage, nor to advance one
step till he had first reconnoitred every place; nor hazard a
battle till he should be sure of success.
</p>

<p>
As soon as both armies were in sight, Hannibal, to terrify
the Roman forces, offered them battle, by advancing almost
to the very entrenchments of their camp. But finding every
thing quiet there, he retired; blaming, in appearance, the
cowardice of the enemy, whom he upbraided with having at
last lost that valour so natural to their ancestors; but fretted
inwardly, to find he had to do with a general of so different a
disposition from Sempronius and Flaminius; and that the
Romans, instructed by their defeat, had at last made choice of
a commander capable of opposing Hannibal.
</p>

<p>
From this moment he perceived that the dictator would not
be formidable to him by the boldness of his attacks, but by
the prudence and regularity of his conduct, which might perplex
and embarrass him very much. The only circumstance he
now wanted to know, was, whether the new general had firmness
enough to pursue steadily the plan he seemed to have laid
down. He endeavoured, therefore, to shake his resolution by
the different movements which he made, by laying waste the
lands, plundering the cities, and burning the villages and towns.
He, at one time, would raise his camp with the utmost precipitation;
and, at another, stop short in some valley out of the
common route, to try whether he could not surprise him in the
plain. However, Fabius still kept his troops on the hills, but
without losing sight of Hannibal; never approaching near
enough to come to an engagement; nor yet keeping at such a
distance, as might give him an opportunity of escaping him.
He never suffered his soldiers to stir out of the camp, except
to forage, nor ever on those occasions without a numerous
convoy. If ever he engaged, it was only in slight skirmishes,
and so very cautiously, that his troops had always the advantage.
By this conduct he revived, by insensible degrees, the
courage of the soldiers, which the loss of three battles had
entirely damped; and enabled them to rely, as they had
formerly done, on their valour and good fortune.
</p>

<p>
Hannibal, having got an immense booty in Campania, where
he had resided a considerable time, left that country, in order
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
that he might not consume the provisions he had laid up, and
which he reserved for the winter season. Besides, he could
no longer continue in a country of gardens and vineyards,
which were more agreeable to the eye than useful for the subsistence
of an army; a country where he would have been
forced to take up his winter quarters among marshes, rocks,
and sands; while the Romans would have drawn plentiful supplies
from Capua, and the richest parts of Italy. He therefore
resolved to settle elsewhere.
</p>

<p>
Fabius naturally supposed, that Hannibal would be obliged
to return the same way he came, and that he might easily
annoy him during his march. He began by throwing a considerable
body of troops into Casilinum, and thereby securing
that small town, situated on the Vulturnus, which separated
the territories of Falernum from those of Capua: he afterwards
detached four thousand men, to seize the only pass through
which Hannibal could come out; and then, according to his
usual custom, posted himself with the remainder of the army
on the hills adjoining to the road.
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginians arrive, and encamp in the plain at the
foot of the mountains. And now the crafty Carthaginian falls
into the same snare he had laid for Flaminius at the defile of
Thrasymenus; and it seemed impossible for him ever to extricate
himself out of this difficulty, there being but one outlet,
of which the Romans were possessed. Fabius, fancying himself
sure of his prey, was only contriving how to seize it. He
flattered himself, and not without the appearance of probability,
with the hopes of putting an end to the war by this single battle.
Nevertheless, he thought fit to defer the attack till the next day.
</p>

<p>
Hannibal perceived, that his own artifices were now employed
against him.<note place='foot'>Nec Annibalem lefellit suis se artibus
peti. Liv.&mdash;Trans.</note> It is in such junctures as these, that a
general has need of unusual presence of mind and fortitude,
to view danger in its utmost extent, without being dismayed;
and to find out sure and instant expedients without deliberating.
Immediately, the Carthaginian general caused two thousand
oxen to be got together, and ordered small bundles of vine-branches
to be tied to their horns. Towards the dead of night,
having commanded the branches to be set on fire, he caused
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
the oxen to be driven with violence to the top of the hills where
the Romans were encamped. As soon as these creatures felt
the flame, the pain rendering them furious, they flew up and
down on all sides, and set fire to the shrubs and bushes they
met in their way. This squadron, of a new kind, was sustained
by a good number of light-armed soldiers, who had orders to
seize upon the summit of the mountain, and to charge the
enemy, in case they should meet them. All things happened
as Hannibal had foreseen. The Romans who guarded the
defile, seeing the fires spread over the hills which were above
them, and imagining that it was Hannibal making his escape
by torch-light, quit their post, and run up to the mountains to
oppose his passage. The main body of the army not knowing
what to think of all this tumult, and Fabius himself not daring
to stir, while it was dark, for fear of a surprise, wait for the
return of the day. Hannibal seizes this opportunity, marches
his troops and the spoils through the defile, which was now unguarded,
and rescues his army out of a snare in which, had
Fabius been but a little more vigorous, it would either have
been destroyed, or at least very much weakened. It is glorious
for a man to turn his very errors to his advantage, and make
them subservient to his reputation.
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginian army returned to Apulia, still pursued
and harassed by the Romans. The dictator, being obliged to
take a journey to Rome on account of some religious ceremonies,
earnestly entreated his general of horse, before his departure,
not to fight during his absence. However, Minucius
did not regard either his advice or his entreaties; but the very
first opportunity he had, whilst part of Hannibal's troops were
foraging, he charged the rest, and gained some advantage. He
immediately sent advice of this to Rome, as if he had obtained
a considerable victory. The news of this, with what had just
before happened at the passage of the defile, raised complaints
and murmurs against the slow and timorous circumspection of
Fabius. In a word, matters were carried so far, that the
Roman people gave his general of horse an equal authority with
him; a thing unheard-of before. The dictator was upon the
road when he received advice of this: for he had left Rome, in
order that he might not be an eye-witness of what was contriving
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
against him. His constancy, however, was not shaken.
He was very sensible, that though his authority in the command
was divided, yet his skill in the art of war was not so.<note place='foot'>Satis
fidens haudquaquam cum imperii jure artem imperandi æquatam. Liv. l.
xxii. n. 26.&mdash;Trans.</note> This soon became manifest.
</p>

<p>
Minucius, grown arrogant at the advantage he had gained
over his colleague, proposed that each should command a day
alternately, or even a longer time. But Fabius rejected this
proposal, as it would have exposed the whole army to danger
whilst under the command of Minucius. He therefore chose
to divide the troops, in order that it might be in his power to
preserve, at least, that part which should fall to his share.
</p>

<p>
Hannibal, fully informed of all that passed in the Roman
camp, was overjoyed to hear of this dissension between the two
commanders. He therefore laid a snare for the rash Minucius,
who accordingly plunged headlong into it; and engaged the
enemy on an eminence, in which an ambuscade was concealed.
But his troops being soon put into disorder, were just upon
the point of being cut to pieces, when Fabius, alarmed by the
sudden outcries of the wounded, called aloud to his soldiers:
<q>Let us hasten to the assistance of Minucius: let us fly and
snatch the victory from the enemy, and extort from our fellow-citizens
a confession of their fault.</q> This succour was very
seasonable, and compelled Hannibal to sound a retreat. The
latter, as he was retiring, said, <q>That the cloud which had been
long hovering on the summit of the mountain, had at last
burst with a loud crack, and caused a mighty storm.</q> So important
and seasonable a service done by the dictator, opened
the eyes of Minucius. He accordingly acknowledged his error,
returned immediately to his duty and obedience, and showed,
that it is sometimes more glorious to know how to atone for
a fault, than not to have committed it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The state of Affairs in Spain.<note place='foot'>Polyb.
l. iii. p. 245-250. Liv. l. xxii. n. 19-22.</note></hi>&mdash;In the
beginning of this campaign, Cn. Scipio, having suddenly attacked the Carthaginian
fleet, commanded by Hamilcar, defeated it, and took twenty-five
ships, with a great quantity of rich spoils. This victory made
the Romans sensible, that they ought to be particularly attentive
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
to the affairs of Spain, because Hannibal could draw considerable
supplies both of men and money from that country.
Accordingly, they sent a fleet thither, the command whereof was
given to P. Scipio, who, after his arrival in Spain, having joined
his brother, did the commonwealth very great service. Till
that time the Romans had never ventured beyond the Ebro.
They had been satisfied with having gained the friendship of
the nations situated between that river and Italy, and confirming
it by alliances: but under Publius, they crossed the Ebro,
and carried their arms much further up into the country.
</p>

<p>
The circumstance which contributed most to promote their
affairs, was, the treachery of a Spaniard in Saguntum. Hannibal
had left there the children of the most distinguished families
in Spain, whom he had taken as hostages. Abelox, for so
this Spaniard was called, persuaded Bostar, the governor of
the city, to send back these young men into their country, in
order, by that means, to attach the inhabitants more firmly to
the Carthaginian interest. He himself was charged with this
commission. But he carried them to the Romans, who afterwards
delivered them to their relations, and, by so acceptable
a present, acquired their amity.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3789. A. Rom. 533.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>The Battle of Cannæ.<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. iii. p. 255-268. Liv.
l. xxii. n. 34-54.</note></hi>&mdash;The next spring, C. Terentius Varro
and L. Æmilius Paulus were chosen consuls at Rome.
In this campaign, which was the third of the second
Punic war, the Romans did what had never been practised
before, that is, they composed the army of eight legions,
each consisting of five thousand men, exclusive of the allies.
For, as we have already observed, the Romans never raised but
four legions, each of which consisted of about four thousand foot,
and three hundred horse.<note place='foot'>Polybius supposes only two hundred horse
in each legion: but J. Lipsius thinks that this is a mistake either of the author
or transcriber.&mdash;Trans.</note> They never, except on the most important
occasions, made them consist of five thousand of the
one, and four hundred of the other. As for the troops of the
allies, their infantry was equal to that of the legions, but they
had three times as many horse. Each of the consuls had commonly
half the troops of the allies, with two legions, in order
for them to act separately; and it was very seldom that all
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
these forces were used at the same time, and in the same expedition.
Here the Romans had not only four, but eight legions,
so important did the affair appear to them. The senate
even thought fit, that the two consuls of the foregoing year,
Servilius and Attilius, should serve in the army as proconsuls;
but the latter could not go into the field, by reason of his
great age.
</p>

<p>
Varro, at his setting out from Rome, had declared openly,
that he would fall upon the enemy the very first opportunity,
and put an end to the war; adding, that it would never be terminated,
so long as men such as Fabius should be at the head
of the Roman armies. An advantage which he gained over
the Carthaginians, of whom near seventeen hundred were
killed, greatly increased his boldness and arrogance. As for
Hannibal, he considered this loss as a real advantage; being
persuaded that it would serve as a bait to the consul's rashness,
and prompt him on to a battles which he wanted extremely. It
was afterwards known, that Hannibal was reduced to such a
scarcity of provisions, that he could not possibly have subsisted
ten days longer. The Spaniards were already meditating to
leave him. So that there would have been an end of Hannibal
and his army, if his good fortune had not thrown a Varro in
in his way.
</p>

<p>
Both armies, having often removed from place to place, came
in sight of each other near Cannæ, a little town in Apulia,
situated on the river Aufidus. As Hannibal was encamped in
a level open country, and his cavalry much superior to that of
the Romans, Æmilius did not think proper to engage in such a
place. He wished to draw the enemy into a spot, where the
infantry might have the greatest share in the action. But his
colleague, who was unexperienced, was of a contrary opinion.
Such is the inconveniency of a divided command; jealousy, a
disparity of tempers, or a diversity of views, seldom failing to
create a dissension between the two generals.
</p>

<p>
The troops on each side were, for some time, contented with
slight skirmishes. But, at last, one day, when Varro had the
command, (for the two consuls took it by turns,) preparations
were made on both sides for battle. Æmilius had not been
consulted; yet, though he extremely disapproved the conduct
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
of his colleague, as it was not in his power to prevent it, he
seconded him to the utmost.
</p>

<p>
Hannibal, after having made his soldiers observe, that,
being superior in cavalry, they could not possibly have pitched
upon a better spot for fighting, had it been left to their choice:
<q>Return, then,</q> says he, <q>thanks to the gods for having brought
the enemy hither, that you may triumph over them; and thank
me also, for having reduced the Romans to a necessity of
coming to an engagement. After three great successive victories,
is not the remembrance of your own actions sufficient to
inspire you with courage? By the former battles, you are
become masters of the open country; but this will put you in
possession of all the cities, and, I presume to say it, of all the
riches and power of the Romans. It is not words that we
want, but action. I trust in the gods, that you shall soon see
my promises verified.</q>
</p>

<p>
The two armies were very unequal in number. That of the
Romans, including the allies, amounted to fourscore thousand
foot, and a little above six thousand horse; and that of the
Carthaginians consisted but of forty thousand foot, all well
disciplined, and of ten thousand horse. Æmilius commanded
the right wing of the Romans, Varro the left, and Servilius,
one of the consuls of the last year, was posted in the centre.
Hannibal, who had the art of turning every incident to advantage,
had posted himself, so as that the wind Vulturnus,<note place='foot'>A violent
burning wind, blowing south-south-east, which, in this flat and sandy country,
raised clouds of hot dust, and blinded and choked the Romans.&mdash;Trans.</note> which
rises at certain stated times, should blow directly in the faces
of the Romans during the fight, and cover them with dust;
then keeping the river Aufidus on his left, and posting his
cavalry in the wings, he formed his main body of the Spanish
and Gaulish infantry, which he posted in the centre, with half the
African heavy-armed foot on their right, and half on their left,
on the same line with the cavalry. His army being thus drawn
up, he put himself at the head of the Spanish and Gaulish
infantry; and having drawn them out of the line, advanced to
give battle, rounding his front as he drew nearer the enemy;
and extending his flanks in the shape of a half moon, in order
that he might leave no interval between his main body and the
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
rest of the line, which consisted of the heavy-armed infantry,
who had not moved from their posts.
</p>

<p>
The fight soon began, and the Roman legions that were in
the wings, seeing their centre warmly attacked, advanced to
charge the enemy in flank. Hannibal's main body, after a
brave resistance, finding themselves furiously attacked on all
sides, gave way, being overpowered by numbers; and retired
through the interval they had left in the centre of the line.
The Romans having pursued them thither with eager confusion,
the two wings of the African infantry, which were fresh, well
armed, and in good order, wheeled about on a sudden towards
that void space in which the Romans, who were already fatigued,
had thrown themselves in disorder; and attacked them vigorously
on both sides, without allowing them time to recover
themselves, or leaving them ground to draw up. In the mean
time, the two wings of the cavalry, having defeated those of
the Romans, which were much inferior to them, and having
left in the pursuit of the broken and scattered squadrons, only as
many forces as were necessary to keep them from rallying,
advanced and charged the rear of the Roman infantry, which
being surrounded at once on every side by the enemy's horse
and foot was all cut to pieces, after having fought with unparalleled
bravery. Æmilius being covered with the wounds
he had received in the fight, was afterwards killed by a body
of the enemy to whom he was not known; and with him two
quæstors; one and twenty military tribunes; many who had
been either consuls or prætors; Servilius, one of the last
year's consuls; Minucius, the late general of horse to Fabius;
and fourscore senators. Above seventy thousand men fell in
this battle;<note place='foot'>Livy lessens very much the number of
the slain, making them amount but to about forty-three thousand. But
Polybius ought rather to be believed.&mdash;Trans.</note> and the
Carthaginians, so great was their fury,<note place='foot'>Duo maximi exercitus
cæsi ad hostium satietatem, donec Annibal diceret militi suo: Parce ferro.
Flor. l. 1. c. 6.&mdash;Trans.</note>
did not give over the slaughter, till Hannibal, in the very heat
of it, called out to them several times; <q>Stop, soldiers, spare
the vanquished.</q> Ten thousand men, who had been left to
guard the camp, surrendered themselves prisoners of war after
the battle. Varro the consul retired to Venusia, with only
seventy horse; and about four thousand men escaped into the
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
neighbouring cities. Thus Hannibal remained master of the
field, he being chiefly indebted for this, as well as for his
former victories, to the superiority of his cavalry over that of
the Romans. He lost four thousand Gauls, fifteen hundred
Spaniards and Africans, and two hundred horse.
</p>

<p>
Maharbal, one of the Carthaginian generals, advised Hannibal
to march without loss of time directly to Rome, promising
him, that within five days they should sup in the Capitol.
Hannibal answering, that it was an affair which required
mature deliberation; <q>I see,</q> replies Maharbal, <q>that the
gods have not endowed the same man with all talents. You,
Hannibal, know how to conquer, but not to make the best use
of a victory.</q><note place='foot'>Tum Maharbal: Non omnia nimirum eidem Dii dedêre.
Vincere scis, Annibal, victoriâ uti nescis. Liv. l. xxii. n. 51.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is pretended that this delay saved Rome and the empire.
Many authors, and among the rest Livy, charge Hannibal, on
this occasion, as being guilty of a capital error. But others,
more reserved, are not for condemning, without evident proofs,
so renowned a general, who in the rest of his conduct was
never wanting, either in prudence to make choice of the best
expedients, or in readiness to put his designs in execution.
They, besides, are inclined to judge favourably of him, from
the authority, or at least the silence, of Polybius, who, speaking
of the memorable consequences of this celebrated battle, says,
that the Carthaginians were firmly persuaded, that they should
possess themselves of Rome at the first assault; but then he
does not mention how this could possibly have been effected,
as that city was very populous, warlike, strongly fortified, and
defended with a garrison of two legions; nor does he any
where give the least hint that such a project was feasible, or
that Hannibal did wrong in not attempting to put it in
execution.
</p>

<p>
And indeed, if we examine matters more narrowly, we shall
find, that according to the common maxims of war it could
not be undertaken. It is certain, that Hannibal's whole infantry,
before the battle, amounted but to forty thousand men;
and, as six thousand of these had been slain in the action,
and doubtless, many more wounded and disabled, there could
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
remain but six or seven and twenty thousand foot fit for service;
now this number was not sufficient to invest so large a city as
Rome, which had a river running through it; nor to attack it
in form, because they had neither engines, ammunition, nor
any other things necessary for carrying on a siege. For
want of these, Hannibal, even after his victory at Thrasymenus,
miscarried in his attempt upon Spoletum;<note place='foot'>Liv. l.
xxii. n. 9. Ibid. l. xxiii. n. 18.</note> and soon after the
battle of Cannæ, was forced to raise the siege of a little
city,<note place='foot'>Casilinum.&mdash;Trans.</note>
of no note, and of no great strength. It cannot be
denied, but that had he miscarried on the present occasion,
nothing less could have been expected but that he must have
been irrecoverably lost. However, to form a just judgment of
this matter, a man ought to be a soldier, and a soldier, perhaps,
of those times. This is an old dispute, on which none
but those who are perfectly well skilled in the art of war
should pretend to give their opinion.
</p>

<p>
Soon after the battle of Cannæ, Hannibal had despatched
his brother Mago to Carthage, with the news of his victory,
and at the same time to demand succours, in order that he
might be enabled to put an end to the war.<note place='foot'>Liv.
l. xxiii. n. 11-14.</note> Mago, on his
arrival, made, in full senate, a lofty speech, in which he extolled
his brother's exploits, and displayed the great advantages
he had gained over the Romans. And, to give a more
lively idea of the greatness of the victory, by speaking in some
measure to the eye, he poured out, in the middle of the senate,
a bushel<note place='foot'>Pliny, l. xxxiii. c. 1, says, that there
were three bushels sent to Carthage. Livy observes, that some authors
make them amount to three bushels and a half; but he thinks it most
probable that there was but one, l. xxxiii. n. 12. Florus, l. ii. c.
16, makes it two bushels.&mdash;Trans.</note>
of gold rings, which had been taken from the fingers
of such of the Roman nobility as had fallen in the battle of
Cannæ. He concluded with demanding money, provisions,
and fresh troops. All the spectators were struck with an
extraordinary joy; upon which Imilcon, a great stickler for
Hannibal, fancying he had now a fair opportunity to insult
Hanno, the chief of the contrary faction, asked him, whether
he was still dissatisfied with the war they were carrying on
against the Romans, and was for having Hannibal delivered
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
up to them? Hanno, without discovering the least emotion,
replied, that he was still of the same mind; and that the victories
of which they so much boasted (supposing them real)
could not give him joy, but only in proportion as they should
be made subservient to an advantageous peace: he then undertook
to prove, that the mighty exploits, on which they
insisted so much, were wholly chimerical and imaginary. <q>I
have cut to pieces,</q> says he (continuing Mago's speech,) <q>the
Roman armies: send me some troops.&mdash;What more could you
ask had you been conquered? I have twice seized upon the
enemy's camp, full (no doubt) of provisions of every kind.&mdash;Send
me provisions and money.&mdash;Could you have talked
otherwise had you lost your camp?</q> He then asked Mago,
whether any of the Latin nations had come over to Hannibal,
and whether the Romans had made him any proposals of
peace? To this Mago answering in the negative: <q>I then perceive,</q>
replied Hanno, <q>that we are no farther advanced, than
when Hannibal first landed in Italy.</q> The inference he drew
from hence was, that neither men nor money ought to be sent.
But Hannibal's faction prevailing at that time, no regard was
paid to Hanno's remonstrances, which were considered merely
as the effect of prejudice and jealousy; and, accordingly, orders
were given for levying, without delay, the supplies of men and
money which Hannibal required. Mago set out immediately
for Spain, to raise twenty-four thousand foot, and four thousand
horse in that country; but these levies were afterwards stopped,
and sent to another quarter; so eager was the contrary faction
to oppose the designs of a general whom they utterly abhorred.
While in Rome, a consul,<note place='foot'>De St. Evremond.</note>
who had fled, was thanked because he
had not despaired of the commonwealth; at Carthage, people
were almost angry with Hannibal, for being victorious. But
Hanno could never forgive him the advantages he had gained
in this war, because he had undertaken it in opposition to his
counsel. Thus being more jealous for the honour of his own
opinions than for the good of his country, and a greater enemy
to the Carthaginian general than to the Romans, he did all that
lay in his power to prevent future success, and to render of no
avail that which had been already gained.
</p>

<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hannibal takes up his Winter Quarters in Capua.<note place='foot'>Liv.
l. xxiii. n. 4-18.</note></hi>&mdash;The
battle of Cannæ subjected the most powerful nations of Italy
to Hannibal, drew over to his interest Græcia Magna,<note place='foot'>Cæterùm quum
Græci omnem ferè oram maritimam Coloniis suis, è Græciâ deductis, obsiderent, &amp;c. But
after the Greeks had, by their colonies, possessed themselves of almost all the maritime
coast, this very country (together with Sicily) was called Græcia Magna, &amp;c. Cluver.
<hi rend='italic'>Geograph.</hi> l. iii. c. 30.&mdash;Trans.</note> with
the city of Tarentum; and thus wrested from the Romans
their most ancient allies, among whom the Capuans held the
first rank. This city, by the fertility of its soil, its advantageous
situation, and the blessings of a long peace, had risen
to great wealth and power. Luxury, and a fondness for pleasure,
(the usual attendants on wealth,) had corrupted the minds
of all its citizens, who, from their natural inclination, were but
too much inclined to voluptuousness and excess.
</p>

<p>
Hannibal<note place='foot'>Ibi partem majorem hiemis exercitum in tectis habuit;
adversùs omnia humana mala sæpe ac diu durantem, bonis inexpertum atque insuetum. Itaque
quos nulla mali vicerat vis, perdidere nimia bona ac voluptates immodicæ, et eo impensiùs
quo avidiùs ex insolentiâ ineas se merserant. Liv. l. xxiii. n. 18.&mdash;Trans.</note>
made choice of this city for his winter quarters.
Here it was that those soldiers, who had sustained the most
grievous toils, and braved the most formidable dangers, were
overthrown by abundance and a profusion of luxuries, into
which they plunged with the greater eagerness, as they, till
then, had been strangers to them. Their courage was so
greatly enervated in this bewitching retirement, that all their
after efforts were owing rather to the fame and splendour of
their former victories than to their present strength. When
Hannibal marched his forces out of the city, one would have
taken them for other men, and the reverse of those who had
so lately marched into it. Accustomed, during the winter
season, to commodious lodgings, to ease and plenty, they
were no longer able to bear hunger, thirst, long marches,
watchings, and the other toils of war; not to mention that all
obedience, all discipline, were entirely laid aside.
</p>

<p>
I only transcribe on this occasion from Livy. If we are to
adopt his opinion on this subject, Hannibal's stay at Capua
was a capital blemish in his conduct; and he pretends, that
this general was guilty of an infinitely greater error, than when
he neglected to march directly to Rome after the battle of
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
Cannæ. For this delay,<note place='foot'>Illa enim cunctatio distulisse
modò victoriam videri potuit, hic error vires ademisse
ad vincendum. Liv. l. xxiii. n. 18.&mdash;Trans.</note> says Livy, might seem only to
have retarded his victory; whereas this last misconduct rendered
him absolutely incapable of ever defeating the enemy.
In a word, as Marcellus observed judiciously afterwards,
Capua was to the Carthaginians and their general, what
Cannæ<note place='foot'>Capuam Annibali Cannas fuisse: ibi virtutem bellicam,
ibi militarem disciplinam, ibi præteriti temporis famam, ibi spem futuri
extinctam. Liv. l. xxiii. n. 45.&mdash;Trans.</note> had been to the Romans. There their
martial genius, their love of discipline, were lost: there their former fame, and
their almost certain hopes of future glory, vanished at once.
And, indeed, from thenceforth the affairs of Hannibal advanced
to their decline by swift steps; fortune declared in favour of
prudence, and victory seemed now reconciled to the Romans.
</p>

<p>
I know not whether Livy has just ground to impute all
these fatal consequences to the delicious abode of Capua. If
we examine carefully all the circumstances of this history, we
shall scarce be able to persuade ourselves, that the little progress
which was afterwards made by the arms of Hannibal,
ought to be ascribed to his wintering at Capua. It might,
indeed, have been one cause, but a very inconsiderable one:
and the bravery with which the forces of Hannibal afterwards
defeated the armies of consuls and prætors; the towns they
took even in sight of the Romans; their maintaining their
conquests so vigorously, and staying fourteen years after this
in Italy, in spite of the Romans: all these circumstances may
induce us to believe, that Livy lays too great a stress on the
delights of Capua.
</p>

<p>
The real cause of the decline of Hannibal's affairs, was
owing to his want of necessary recruits and succours from
Carthage. After Mago's speech, the Carthaginian senate
had judged it necessary,<note place='foot'>Liv. l. xxiii. n.
13.</note> in order for the carrying on the conquests
in Italy, to send thither a considerable reinforcement of
Numidian horse, forty elephants, and a thousand talents; and
to hire, in Spain, twenty thousand foot, and four thousand
horse, to reinforce their armies in Spain and Italy. Nevertheless,
Mago could obtain an order but for twelve thousand
foot, and two thousand five hundred horse:<note place='foot'>Ibid. n.
32.</note> and even when he
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
was just going to march to Italy with this reinforcement, so
much inferior to that which had been promised him, he was
countermanded and sent to Spain. So that Hannibal, after
these mighty promises, had neither infantry, cavalry, elephants,
nor money sent him; but was left to depend upon his own
personal resources. His army was now reduced to twenty-six
thousand foot, and nine thousand horse. How could it be
possible for him, with so inconsiderable an army, to seize, in
an enemy's country, on all the advantageous posts; to awe
his new allies; to preserve his old conquests and form new
ones; and to keep the field, with advantage, against two
armies of the Romans which were recruited every year? This
was the true cause of the declension of Hannibal's affairs, and
of the ruin of those of Carthage. Was the part where Polybius
treated this subject extant, we doubtless should find, that he
lays a greater stress on this cause, than on the luxurious
delights of Capua.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3790. A. Rom. 534.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>Transactions relating to Spain and Sardinia.<note place='foot'>Liv. l.
xxiii. n. 26-30. and n. 32, 40, 41.</note></hi>&mdash;The two
Scipios still continued in the command of Spain, and
their arms were making a considerable progress there,
when Asdrubal, who alone seemed able to cope with
them, received orders from Carthage to march into Italy to
the relief of his brother. Before he left Spain, he writ to the
senate, to convince them of the absolute necessity of their
sending a general in his stead, who was capable of making
head against the Romans. Imilcon was therefore sent thither
with an army; and Asdrubal set out upon his march with his,
in order to go and join his brother. The news of his departure
was no sooner known, than the greatest part of Spain
was subjected by the Scipios. These two generals, animated
by such signal success, resolved to prevent him, if possible,
from leaving Spain. They considered the danger to which
the Romans would be exposed, if, being scarce able to resist
Hannibal alone, they should be attacked by the two brothers,
at the head of two powerful armies. They therefore pursued
Asdrubal, and, coming up with that general, forced him to
fight against his inclination. Asdrubal was overcome; and,
so far from being able to continue his march for Italy, he
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
found that it would be impossible for him to continue with
any safety in Spain.
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginians had no better success in Sardinia. Designing
to take advantage of some rebellions which they had
fomented in that country, they lost twelve thousand men in a
battle fought against the Romans, who took a still greater
number of prisoners, among whom were Asdrubal, surnamed
Calvus, Hanno, and Mago,<note place='foot'>Not Hannibal's
brother.&mdash;Trans.</note> who were distinguished by their
birth as well as military exploits.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3791. A. Rom. 535.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>The ill Success of Hannibal. The Sieges of Capua and
Rome.<note place='foot'>Liv. l. xxiii. n. 41-46. l. xxv. n. 22.
l. xxvi. n. 5-16.</note></hi>&mdash;From the time of Hannibal's abode in
Capua, the Carthaginian affairs in Italy no longer
supported their former reputation. M. Marcellus,
first as prætor, and afterwards as consul, had contributed very
much to this revolution. He harassed Hannibal's army on
every occasion, seized upon his quarters, forced him to raise
sieges, and even defeated him in several engagements; so that
he was called the Sword of Rome, as Fabius had before been
named its Buckler.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3793. A. Rom 537.</note>
But what most affected the Carthaginian general, was, to
see Capua besieged by the Romans. In order,
therefore, to preserve his reputation among his
allies, by a vigorous support of those who held the
chief rank as such, he flew to the relief of that city, brought
forward his forces, attacked the Romans, and fought several
battles to oblige them to raise the siege.
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3794. A. Rom. 538.</note> At last,
seeing all his measures defeated, he marched hastily
towards Rome, in order to make a powerful diversion.
He was not without hope of being able, in case he could
have an opportunity, in the first consternation, to storm some
part of the city, of drawing the Roman generals with all their
forces from the siege of Capua, to the relief of their capital;
at least he flattered himself, that if, for the sake of continuing
the siege, they should divide their forces, their weakness
might then offer an occasion, either to the Capuans or himself,
of engaging and defeating them. Rome was surprised, but
not confounded. A proposal being made by one of the
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
senators, to recall all the armies to succour Rome; Fabius<note place='foot'>Flagitiosum
esse terreri ac circumagi ad omnes Annibalis comminationes.
Liv. l. xxvi. n. 8.&mdash;Trans.</note>
declared, that it would be shameful in them to be terrified,
and forced to change their measures upon every motion of
Hannibal. They therefore contented themselves with only
recalling part of the army, and one of the generals, Q. Fulvius
the proconsul, from the siege. Hannibal, after making some
devastations, drew up his army in order of battle before the
city, and the consul did the same. Both sides were preparing
to signalize themselves in a battle, of which Rome was to be
the recompense, when a violent storm obliged them to separate.
They were no sooner returned to their respective camps,
than the face of the heavens grew calm and serene. The
same incident happened frequently afterwards; insomuch that
Hannibal, believing that there was something supernatural in
the event, said, according to Livy, that sometimes<note place='foot'>Audita vox
Annibalis fertur, Potiundæ sibi urbis Romæ, modò mentem non
dari, modò fortunam. Liv. l. xxvi. n. 11.&mdash;Trans.</note> his own
will, and sometimes fortune, would not suffer him to take
Rome.
</p>

<p>
But the circumstance which most surprised and intimidated
him, was the news, that, whilst he lay encamped at one of the
gates of Rome, the Romans had sent out recruits for the army
in Spain at another gate; and that the ground, whereon his
camp was pitched, had been sold, notwithstanding that circumstance,
for its full value. So barefaced a contempt stung
Hannibal to the quick; he, therefore, on the other side, put
up to auction the shops of the goldsmiths round the Forum.
After this bravado he retired, and, in his march, plundered
the rich temple of the goddess Feronia.<note place='foot'>Feronia was
the goddess of groves, and there was one, with a temple in it, dedicated
to her, at the foot of the mountain Soracte. Strabo, speaking of the grove
where the goddess was worshipped, says, that a sacrifice was offered annually to her
in it; and that her votaries, inspired by this goddess, walked unhurt over burning
coals. There are still extant some medals of Augustus, in which this goddess is
represented with a crown on her head.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
Capua, thus left to itself, held out but very little longer.
After that such of its senators as had the chief hand in the
revolt, and consequently could not expect any quarter from
the Romans, had put themselves to a truly tragical death,<note place='foot'>Vilius
Virius, the chief of this conspiracy, after having represented to the
Capuan senate, the severe treatment which his country might expect from the Romans,
prevailed with twenty-seven senators to go with him to his own house, where,
after eating a plentiful dinner, and heating themselves with wine, they all drank
poison. Then taking their last farewell, some withdrew to their own houses, others
staid with Virius; and all expired before the gates were opened to the Romans.
Liv. l. xxvi. n. 13, 14.&mdash;Trans.</note> the
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
city surrendered at discretion. The success of this siege, which,
by the happy consequences wherewith it was attended, proved
decisive, and fully restored to the Romans their superiority
over the Carthaginians; displayed, at the same time, how
formidable the power of the Romans was,<note place='foot'>Confessio
expressa hosti, quanta vis in Romanis ad expetendas pœnas ab infidelibus
sociis, et quàm nihil in Annibale auxilii ad receptos in fidem tuendos esset.
Liv. l. xxvi. n. 16.&mdash;Trans.</note> when they undertook
to punish their perfidious allies; and the feeble protection
which Hannibal could afford his friends at a time when they
most wanted it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3793. A. Rom. 537.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>The Defeat and Death of the two Scipios in Spain.<note place='foot'>Liv.
xxv. n. 32-39.</note></hi>&mdash;The
face of affairs was very much changed in Spain. The
Carthaginians had three armies in that country; one
commanded by Asdrubal, the son of Gisgo; the
second by Asdrubal, son of Hamilcar; and a third under Mago,
who had joined the first Asdrubal. The two Scipios, Cneus
and Publius, were for dividing their forces, and attacking the
enemy separately, which was the cause of their ruin. They
agreed that Cneus, with a small number of Romans, and thirty
thousand Celtiberians, should march against Asdrubal, the son
of Hamilcar; whilst Publius, with the remainder of the forces,
composed of Romans and the Italian allies, should advance
against the other two generals.
</p>

<p>
Publius was vanquished first. To the two leaders whom he
had to oppose, Masinissa, elate with the victories he had lately
gained over Syphax, joined himself; and was to be soon followed
by Indibilis, a powerful Spanish prince. The armies
came to an engagement. The Romans, being thus attacked
on all sides at once, made a brave resistance as long as they
had their general at their head; but the moment he fell, the
few troops which had escaped the slaughter, secured themselves
by flight.
</p>

<p>
The three victorious armies marched immediately in quest
of Cneus, in order to put an end to the war by his defeat. He
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
was already more than half vanquished by the desertion of his
allies, who all forsook him; and left to the Roman generals
this important instruction;<note place='foot'>Id quidem
cavendum semper Romanis ducibus erit, exemplaque hæc verè pro
documentis habenda. Ne ita externis credant auxiliis, ut non plus sui roboris suarumque
propriè virium in castris habeant. Liv. n. 33.&mdash;Trans.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> never to let their own forces
be exceeded in number by those of foreigners. He guessed
that his brother was slain, and his army defeated, upon seeing
such great bodies of the enemy arrive. He survived him but a
short time, being killed in the engagement. These two great
men were equally lamented by their citizens and allies; and
Spain deeply felt their loss, because of the justice and moderation
of their conduct.
</p>

<p>
These extensive countries seemed now inevitably lost; but
the valour of L. Marcius,<note place='foot'>He attacked
the Carthaginians, who had divided themselves into two camps,
and were secure, as they thought, from any immediate attempt of the Romans;
killed thirty-seven thousand of them; took one thousand eight hundred prisoners
and brought off immense plunder. Liv. l. xxv. n. 39.&mdash;Trans.</note>
a private officer of the equestrian
order, preserved them to the Romans. Shortly after this, the
younger Scipio was sent thither, who severely revenged the
death of his father and uncle, and restored the affairs of the
Romans in Spain to their former flourishing condition.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3798. A. Rom. 542.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>The Defeat and Death of Asdrubal.<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. xi. p.
622-625. Liv. l. xxvii. p. 35-51.</note></hi>&mdash;One unforeseen
defeat ruined all the measures, and blasted all the
hopes of Hannibal with regard to Italy. The consuls
of this year, which was the eleventh of the
second Punic war, (for I pass over several events for brevity's
sake,) were C. Claudius Nero, and M. Livius. The latter
had, for his province, the Cisalpine Gaul, where he was to
oppose Asdrubal, who, it was reported, was preparing to pass
the Alps. The former commanded in the country of the Brutians,
and in Lucania, that is, in the opposite extremity of Italy,
and was there making head against Hannibal.
</p>

<p>
The passage of the Alps gave Asdrubal very little trouble,
because his brother had cleared the way for him, and all the
nations were disposed to receive him. Some time after this,
he despatched couriers to Hannibal, but they were intercepted.
Nero found by their letters, that Asdrubal was hastening to join
his brother in Umbria. In a conjuncture of so important a
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
nature as this, when the safety of Rome lay at stake, he
thought himself at liberty to dispense with the established
rules<note place='foot'>No general was allowed to leave his own province,
to go into that of another.&mdash;Trans.</note> of his duty, for the welfare of his
country. In consequence of this, it was his opinion, that such a bold and unexpected
blow ought to be struck, as might be capable of striking
terror into the enemy; by marching to join his colleague, in
order that they might charge Asdrubal unexpectedly with their
united forces. This design, if the several circumstances of it
are thoroughly examined, should not be hastily charged with
imprudence. To prevent the two brothers from joining their
armies, was to save the state. Very little would be hazarded,
even though Hannibal should be informed of the absence of
the consul. From his army, which consisted of forty-two thousand
men, he drew out but seven thousand for his own detachment,
which indeed were the flower of his troops, but, at the
same time, a very inconsiderable part of them. The rest remained
in the camp, which was advantageously situated, and
strongly fortified. Now could it be supposed that Hannibal
would attack, and force a strong camp defended by thirty-five
thousand men?
</p>

<p>
Nero set out without giving his soldiers the least notice of
his design. When he had advanced so far, as that it might be
communicated without any danger, he told them, that he was
leading them to certain victory: that, in war, all things depended
upon reputation; that the bare rumour of their arrival
would disconcert all the measures of the Carthaginians; and
that the whole honour of this battle would fall to them.
</p>

<p>
They marched with extraordinary diligence, and joined the
other consul in the night, but did not pitch separate camps,
the better to impose upon the enemy. The troops which were
newly arrived joined those of Livius. The army of Porcius the
prætor was encamped near that of the consul, and in the morning
a council of war was held. Livius was of opinion, that it
would be better to allow the troops some days to refresh themselves;
but Nero besought him not to ruin, by delay, an enterprise
to which despatch only could give success; and to take
advantage of the error of the enemy, as well absent as present.
This advice was complied with, and accordingly the signal for
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
battle was given. Asdrubal, advancing to his foremost ranks,
discovered, by several circumstances, that fresh troops were
arrived; and he did not doubt but that they belonged to the
other consul. This made him conjecture, that his brother had
sustained a considerable loss, and, at the same time, fear, that
he was come too late to his assistance.
</p>

<p>
After making these reflections, he caused a retreat to be
sounded, and his army began to march in great disorder. Night
overtaking him, and his guides deserting, he was uncertain
what way to go. He marched at random, along the banks of
the river Metaurus,<note place='foot'>Now called
Metaro.&mdash;Trans.</note> and was preparing to cross it, when the
three armies of the enemy came up with him. In this extremity,
he saw it would be impossible for him to avoid coming
to an engagement; and therefore did every thing which could
be expected from the presence of mind and valour of a great
captain. He seized an advantageous post, and drew up his
forces on a narrow spot, which gave him an opportunity of
posting his left wing (the weakest part of his army) in such a
manner, that it could neither be attacked in front, nor charged
in flank; and of giving to his main battle and right wing a
greater depth than front. After this hasty disposition of his
forces, he posted himself in the centre, and was the first to
march to attack the enemy's left wing; well knowing that all
was at stake, and that he must either conquer or die. The
battle lasted a long time, and was obstinately disputed by both
parties. Asdrubal, especially, signalized himself in this engagement,
and added new glory to that he had already acquired
by a series of shining actions. He led on his soldiers,
trembling and quite dispirited, against an enemy superior to
them both in numbers and resolution. He animated them by
his words, supported them by his example, and, with entreaties
and menaces, endeavoured to bring back those who fled; till,
at last, seeing that victory declared for the Romans, and being
unable to survive the loss of so many thousand men, who had
quitted their country to follow his fortune, he rushed at once
into the midst of a Roman cohort, and there died in a manner
worthy the son of Hamilcar, and the brother of Hannibal.
</p>

<p>
This was the most bloody battle the Carthaginians had
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
fought during this war: and, whether we consider the death of
the general, or the slaughter made of the Carthaginian forces,
it may be looked upon as a reprisal for the battle of Cannæ.
The Carthaginians lost fifty-five thousand men,<note place='foot'>According
to Polybius, the loss amounted but to ten thousand men, and that of
the Romans to two thousand, l. xi. p. 870, edit. Gronov.&mdash;Trans.</note>
and six thousand
were taken prisoners. The Romans lost eight thousand.
These were so weary of killing, that some person telling Livius,
that he might very easily cut to pieces a body of the enemy
who were flying: <q>It is fit,</q> says he, <q>that some should survive,
in order that they may carry the news of this defeat to the
Carthaginians.</q>
</p>

<p>
Nero set out upon his march, on the very night which followed
the engagement. Through every place where he passed,
in his return, shouts of joy and loud acclamations welcomed
him, instead of those fears and uneasiness which his coming
had occasioned. He arrived in his camp the sixth day. Asdrubal's
head being thrown into the camp of the Carthaginians,
informed Hannibal of his brother's unhappy fate. Hannibal
perceived, by this cruel stroke, the fortune of Carthage: <q>All
is over,</q> says he,<note place='foot'><p>Horace makes
him speak thus, in the beautiful ode where this defeat is described:
</p>
<p>
Carthagini jam non ego nuntios<lb/>
Mittara superbos. Occidit, occidit<lb/>
Spes omnis, et fortuna nostri<lb/>
Nominis, Asdrubale interempto. Lib. iv. <hi rend='italic'>Od.</hi>
4.&mdash;Trans.</p></note> <q>I shall no longer send triumphant messages
to Carthage. In losing Asdrubal, I have lost at once all my
hope, all my good fortune.</q> He afterwards retired to the
extremities of the country of the Brutians, where he assembled
all his forces, who found it a very difficult matter to subsist
there, as no provisions were sent them from Carthage.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3799. A. Rom. 543.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>Scipio conquers all Spain. Is appointed Consul, and sails
into Africa. Hannibal is recalled.<note place='foot'>Polyb. l. xi. p.
650. &amp; l. xiv. p. 677-687. &amp; l. xv. p. 689-694. Liv. l. xxviii.
n. 1-4. 16. 38. 40-46. l. xxix. n. 24-36. l. xxx. n. 20-28.</note></hi>&mdash;The fate of
arms was not more propitious to the Carthaginians
in Spain. The prudent vivacity of young Scipio had
restored the Roman affairs in that country to their former
flourishing state, as the courageous slowness of Fabius had
before done in Italy. The three Carthaginian generals in
Spain, Asdrubal son of Gisco, Hanno, and Mago, having been
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
defeated with their numerous armies by the Romans in several
engagements, Scipio at last possessed himself of Spain, and
subjected it entirely to the Roman power. It was at this time
that Masinissa, a very powerful African prince, went over to
the Romans, and Syphax, on the contrary, to the Carthaginians.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3800. A. Rom. 544.</note>
Scipio, at his return to Rome, was declared consul, being
then thirty years of age. He had P. Licinius Crassus
for his colleague. Sicily was allotted to Scipio, with
permission for him to cross into Africa, if he found it
convenient. He set out with all imaginable expedition for his
province; whilst his colleague was to command in the country
whither Hannibal was retired.
</p>

<p>
The taking of New Carthage, where Scipio had displayed all
the prudence, the courage, and capacity which could have
been expected from the greatest generals, and the conquest of
all Spain, were more than sufficient to immortalize his name:
but he had considered these only as so many steps by which
he was to climb to a nobler enterprise: this was the conquest
of Africa. Accordingly, he crossed over thither, and made it
the seat of the war.
</p>

<p>
The devastation of the country, the siege of Utica, one of
the strongest cities of Africa; the entire defeat of the two
armies under Syphax and Asdrubal, whose camp was burnt by
Scipio; and afterwards the taking Syphax himself prisoner,
who was the most powerful resource the Carthaginians had left;
all these things forced them at last to turn their thoughts to
peace. For this purpose they deputed thirty of their principal
senators, who were selected from that powerful body at Carthage,
called the <hi rend='italic'>council of the hundred</hi>. Being introduced
into the Roman general's tent, they all threw themselves prostrate
on the earth, (such was the custom of their country,)
spoke to him in terms of great submission, accusing Hannibal
as the author of all their calamities, and promising, in the name
of the senate, an implicit obedience to whatever the Romans
should please to ordain. Scipio answered, that though he was
come into Africa not for peace, but conquest, he would however
grant them a peace, upon condition that they should
deliver up all the prisoners and deserters to the Romans; that
they should recall their armies out of Italy and Gaul; should
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
never set foot again in Spain; should retire out of all the
islands between Italy and Africa; should deliver up all their
ships, twenty excepted, to the victor; should give to the Romans
five hundred thousand bushels of wheat, three hundred
thousand of barley, and pay fifteen thousand talents: that in
case they were pleased with these conditions, they then, he
said, might send ambassadors to the senate. The Carthaginians
feigned a compliance, but this was only to gain time, till
Hannibal should be returned. A truce was then granted to
the Carthaginians, who immediately sent deputies to Rome,
and at the same time an express to Hannibal, to order his
return into Africa.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3802. A. Rom. 516.</note>
He was then, as was observed before, in the extremity of
Italy. Here he received the orders from Carthage,
which he could not listen to without groans, and
almost shedding tears; and was exasperated almost
to madness, to see himself thus forced to quit his prey. Never
banished man<note place='foot'>Rarò quenquam
alium patriam exilii causâ relinquentem magis mœstum abiisse
ferunt, quàm Annibalem hostium terrà excedentem. Respexisse sæpe Italiæ littora,
et deos hominesque accusantem, in se quoque ac suum ipsius caput execratum.
Quòd non cruentum ab Cannensi victorià militem Romam duxisset. Liv. l.
xxx. n. 20.&mdash;Trans.</note> showed so much regret at leaving his native
country, as Hannibal did in going out of that of an enemy.
He often turned his eyes wishfully to Italy, accusing gods and
men of his misfortunes, and calling down a thousand curses,
says<note place='foot'>Livy supposes, however, that this
delay was a capital error in Hannibal, which he himself afterwards
regretted.&mdash;Trans.</note> Livy, upon himself, for not having marched his soldiers
directly to Rome, after the battle of Cannæ, whilst they were
still reeking with the blood of its citizens.
</p>

<p>
At Rome, the senate, greatly dissatisfied with the excuses
made by the Carthaginian deputies, in justification of their
republic, and the ridiculous offer which they made, in its name,
of adhering to the treaty of Lutatius; thought proper to refer
the decision of the whole to Scipio, who, being on the spot,
could best judge what conditions the welfare of the state
required.
</p>

<p>
About the same time, Octavius the prætor sailing from Sicily
into Africa with two hundred vessels of burden, was attacked
near Carthage by a furious storm, which dispersed all his fleet.
The citizens, not bearing to see so rich a prey escape them,
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
demanded importunately that the Carthaginian fleet might sail
out and seize it. The senate, after a faint resistance, complied.
Asdrubal, sailing out of the harbour, seized the greatest part of
the Roman ships, and brought them to Carthage, although the
truce was still subsisting.
</p>

<p>
Scipio sent deputies to the Carthaginian senate, to complain
of this, but they were little regarded. Hannibal's approach
had revived their courage, and filled them with great hopes.
The deputies were even in great danger of being ill treated by
the populace. They therefore demanded a convoy, which was
granted, and accordingly two ships of the republic attended
them. But the magistrates, who were absolutely against peace,
and determined to renew the war, gave private orders to Asdrubal,
(who was with the fleet near Utica,) to attack the Roman
galley when it should arrive in the river Bagrada near the
Roman camp, where the convoy was ordered to leave them.
He obeyed the order, and sent out two galleys against the
ambassadors, who nevertheless made their escape, but with
difficulty and danger.
</p>

<p>
This was a fresh subject for a war between the two nations,
who now were more animated, or rather more exasperated,
one against the other, than ever: the Romans, from a desire
of taking vengeance for so black a perfidy; and the Carthaginians,
from a persuasion that they were not now to expect a
peace.
</p>

<p>
At the same time, Lælius and Fulvius, who carried the full
powers with which the senate and people of Rome had invested
Scipio, arrived in the camp, accompanied by the deputies of
Carthage. As the Carthaginians had not only infringed the
truce, but violated the law of nations, in the person of the
Roman ambassadors, it might naturally be expected that they
should order the Carthaginian deputies to be seized by way of
reprisal. However, Scipio,<note place='foot'><p>Ἐσκοπεῖτο παρ᾽
αὐτῷ συλλογιζόμενος, οὐχ οὕτω τί δέον παθεῖν Καρχηδονίους,
ὡς τί δέον ἦν πράξει Ῥωμαίους. Polyb. l. xv. p. 965. edit. Gronov.
</p>
<p>
Quibus Scipio. Etsi nou induciarum modò fides, sed etiam jus gentium in legatis
violatum esset; tamen se nihil nec institutis populi Romani nec suis moribus
indignum in iis facturum esse. Liv. l. xxx. n. 25.&mdash;Trans.</p></note>
more attentive to what was required
by the Roman generosity, than by the perfidy of the
Carthaginians, in order not to deviate from the principles and
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
maxims of his own countrymen, nor his own character, dismissed
the deputies, without offering them the least injury.
So astonishing an instance of moderation, and at such a juncture,
terrified the Carthaginians, and even put them to the
blush; and made Hannibal himself entertain a still higher idea
of a general, who, to the dishonourable practices of his enemies,
opposed only a rectitude and greatness of soul, that was
still more worthy of admiration than all his military virtues.
</p>

<p>
In the mean time, Hannibal, being strongly importuned by
his fellow-citizens, advanced forward into the country; and
arriving at Zama, which is five days' march from Carthage, he
there pitched his camp. He thence sent out spies to observe
the position of the Romans. Scipio having seized these, so
far from punishing them, only commanded them to be led
about the Roman camp, in order that they might take an
exact survey of it, and then sent them back to Hannibal. The
latter knew very well whence so noble an assurance flowed.
After the strange reverses he had met with, he no longer expected
that fortune would again be propitious. Whilst every one
was exciting him to give battle, himself only meditated a peace.
He flattered himself that the conditions of it would be more
honourable, as he was at the head of an army, and as the fate
of arms might still appear uncertain. He, therefore, sent to
desire an interview with Scipio, which accordingly was agreed
to, and the time and place fixed.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3803. A. Rom. 547.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>The Interview between Hannibal and Scipio in Africa, followed
by a Battle.<note place='foot'>Polyb l. xv. p. 694-703. Liv. l.
xxx. n. 29-35.</note></hi>&mdash;These two generals, who were not only
the most illustrious of their own age, but worthy of
being ranked with the most renowned princes and
warriors that had ever lived, having met at the place
appointed, continued for some time in a deep silence, as
though they were astonished, and struck with a mutual admiration
at the sight of each other. At last Hannibal spoke, and
after having praised Scipio in the most artful and delicate
manner, he gave a very lively description of the ravages of the
war, and the calamities in which it had involved both the
victors and the vanquished. He conjured him not to suffer
himself to be dazzled by the splendour of his victories. He
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
represented to him, that how successful soever he might have
hitherto been, he ought, however, to be aware of the inconstancy
of fortune: that without going far back for examples,
he himself, who was then speaking to him, was a glaring proof
of this: that Scipio was at that time what Hannibal had been
at Thrasymenus and Cannæ: that he ought to make a better
use of opportunity than himself had done, by consenting to a
peace, now it was in his power to propose the conditions of it.
He concluded with declaring, that the Carthaginians would
willingly resign Sicily, Sardinia, Spain, and all the islands
between Africa and Italy, to the Romans: that they must be
forced, since such was the will of the gods, to confine themselves
to Africa; whilst they should see the Romans extending
their conquests to the most remote regions, and obliging all
nations to pay obedience to their laws.
</p>

<p>
Scipio answered in few words, but not with less dignity. He
reproached the Carthaginians for their perfidy, in plundering
the Roman galleys before the truce was expired. He imputed
to them alone, and to their injustice, all the calamities with
which the two wars had been attended. After thanking
Hannibal for the admonition he had given him, with regard to
the uncertainty of human events, he concluded with desiring
him to prepare for battle, unless he chose rather to accept of
the conditions that had been already proposed; to which (he
observed) some others would be added, in order to punish the
Carthaginians for their having violated the truce.
</p>

<p>
Hannibal could not prevail with himself to accept these conditions,
and the generals left one another, with the resolution
to decide the fate of Carthage by a general battle. Each
commander exhorted his troops to fight valiantly. Hannibal
enumerated the victories he had gained over the Romans, the
generals he had slain, the armies he had cut to pieces. Scipio
represented to his soldiers, the conquest of both the Spains, his
successes in Africa, and the confession the enemies themselves
made of their weakness, by thus coming to sue for peace. All
this he spoke<note place='foot'>Celsus hæc corpore,
vultuque ita læto, ut vicisse jam crederes, dicebat. Liv. l. xxx.
n. 32.&mdash;Trans.</note> with the tone and air of a conqueror. Never
were motives more powerful to prompt troops to behave gallantly.
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
This day was to complete the glory of the one or the
other of the generals; and to decide whether Rome or Carthage
was to prescribe laws to all other nations.
</p>

<p>
I shall not undertake to describe the order of the battle,
nor the valour of the forces on both sides. The reader will
naturally suppose, that two such experienced generals did not
forget any circumstance which could contribute to the victory.
The Carthaginians, after a very obstinate fight, were obliged
to fly, leaving twenty thousand men on the field of battle, and
the like number of prisoners were taken by the Romans.
Hannibal escaped in the tumult, and entering Carthage, owned
that he was irrecoverably overthrown, and that the citizens
had no other choice left than to accept of peace on any conditions.
Scipio bestowed great eulogiums on Hannibal, chiefly
with regard to his ability in taking advantages, his manner of
drawing up his army, and giving out his orders in the engagement;
and he affirmed, that Hannibal had this day surpassed
himself, although the success had not answered his valour and
conduct.
</p>

<p>
With regard to himself, he well knew how to make a proper
advantage of the victory, and the consternation with which he
had filled the enemy. He commanded one of his lieutenants
to march his land army to Carthage, whilst himself prepared
to conduct the fleet thither.
</p>

<p>
He was not far from the city, when he met a vessel covered
with streamers and olive-branches, bringing ten of the
most considerable persons of the state, as ambassadors to implore
his clemency. However, he dismissed them without
making any answer, and bade them come to him at Tunis,
where he should halt. The deputies of Carthage, thirty in
number, came to him at the place appointed, and sued for
peace in the most submissive terms. He then called a council
there, the majority of which were for rasing Carthage, and
treating the inhabitants with the utmost severity. But the
consideration of the time which must necessarily be employed
before so strongly fortified a city could be taken; and Scipio's
fear lest a successor might be appointed him whilst he should
be employed in the siege, made him incline to clemency.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A Peace concluded between the Carthaginians and the
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
Romans. The End of the Second Punic War.<note place='foot'>Polyb.
l. xv. p. 704-707. Liv. l. xxx. n. 36-44.</note></hi>&mdash;The conditions
of the peace dictated by Scipio to the Carthaginians
were, <q>That the Carthaginians should continue free, and preserve
their laws, their territories, and the cities they possessed
in Africa before the war&mdash;That they should deliver up to the
Romans all deserters, slaves, and prisoners belonging to them;
all their ships, except ten triremes; all the elephants which
they then had, and that they should not train up any more
for war&mdash;That they should not make war out of Africa, nor
even in that country, without first obtaining leave for that
purpose from the Roman people&mdash;Should restore to Masinissa
every thing of which they had dispossessed either him or his
ancestors&mdash;Should furnish money and corn to the Roman
auxiliaries, till their ambassadors should be returned from
Rome&mdash;Should pay to the Romans ten thousand Euboic talents<note place='foot'><p>Ten
thousand Attic talents make thirty millions French money. Ten thousand
Euboic talents make something more than twenty-eight millions, thirty-three thousand
livres; because, according to Budæus, the Euboic talent is equivalent but to
fifty-six minæ and something more, whereas the Attic talent is worth sixty minæ.
</p>
<p>
Or otherwise thus calculated in English money:
</p>
<p>
According to Budæus, the Euboic talent is 56 Minæ<lb/>
56 Minæ reduced to English money is 175<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi><lb/>
Consequently, 10,000 Euboic talents make 1,750,000<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi><lb/>
So that the Carthaginians paid annually 35,000<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>
</p>
<p>
This calculation is as near the truth as it can well be brought; the Euboic talent
being something more than 56 minæ.&mdash;Trans.</p></note>
of silver in fifty annual payments; and give a hundred hostages,
who should be nominated by Scipio. And in order that
they might have time to send to Rome, he agreed to grant
them a truce, upon condition that they should restore the
ships taken during the former, without which they were not
to expect either a truce or peace.</q>
</p>

<p>
When the deputies were returned to Carthage, they laid
before the senate the conditions dictated by Scipio. But they
appeared so intolerable to Gisgo, that rising up, he made a
speech, in order to dissuade his citizens from accepting a
peace on such shameful terms. Hannibal, provoked at the
calmness with which such an orator was heard, took Gisgo by
the arm, and dragged him from his seat. A behaviour so outrageous,
and so remote from the manners of a free city like
Carthage, raised an universal murmur. Hannibal himself was
vexed when he reflected on what he had done, and immediately
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
made an apology for it. <q>As I left,</q> says he, <q>your
city at nine years of age, and did not return to it till after
thirty-six years' absence, I had full leisure to learn the arts of
war, and flatter myself that I have made some improvement
in them. As for your laws and customs, it is no wonder I am
ignorant of them, and I therefore desire you to instruct me in
them.</q> He then expatiated on the indispensable necessity
they were under of concluding a peace. He added, that
they ought to thank the gods for having prompted the
Romans to grant them a peace even on these conditions. He
pointed out to them the great importance of their uniting in
opinion; and of not giving an opportunity, by their divisions,
for the people to take an affair of this nature under their
cognizance. The whole city came over to his opinion; and
accordingly the peace was accepted. The senate made Scipio
satisfaction with regard to the ships reclaimed by him; and,
after obtaining a truce for three months, they sent ambassadors
to Rome.
</p>

<p>
These Carthaginians, who were all venerable for their years
and dignity, were admitted immediately to an audience. Asdrubal,
surnamed Hœdus, who was still an irreconcileable
enemy to Hannibal and his faction, spoke first; and after
having excused, to the best of his power, the people of Carthage,
by imputing the rupture to the ambition of some particular
persons, he added, that had the Carthaginians listened
to his counsels and those of Hanno, they would have been
able to grant the Romans the peace for which they now were
obliged to sue. <q>But,</q><note place='foot'>Rarò simul
hominibus bonam fortunam bonamque mentem dari. Populum Romanum eo
invictum esse, quòd in secundis rebus sapere et consulere meminerit.
Et herclè mirandum fuisse si aliter facerent. Ex insolentiâ, quibus nova bona fortuna
sit, impotentes lætitiæ insanire: populo Romano usitata ac propè obsoleta ex
victoriâ gaudia esse; ac plus penè parcendo victis, quàm vincendo, imnerium auxisse.
Liv. l. xxx n. 42.&mdash;Trans.</note> continued he, <q>wisdom and prosperity
are very rarely found together. The Romans are invincible,
because they never suffer themselves to be blinded by
good fortune. And it would be surprising should they act
otherwise. Success dazzles those only to whom it is new and
unusual; whereas the Romans are so much accustomed to
conquer, that they are almost insensible to the charms of victory;
and it may be said to their glory, that they have extended
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
their empire, in some measure, more by the humanity they have
shown to the conquered, than by the conquest itself.</q> The
other ambassadors spoke with a more plaintive tone of voice,
and represented the calamitous state to which Carthage was
going to be reduced, and the grandeur and power from which
it was fallen.
</p>

<p>
The senate and people being equally inclined to peace,
sent full power to Scipio to conclude it; left the conditions to
that general, and permitted him to march back his army, after
the treaty should be concluded.
</p>

<p>
The ambassadors desired leave to enter the city, to redeem
some of their prisoners, and they found about two hundred
whom they desired to ransom. But the senate sent them to
Scipio, with orders that they should be restored without any
pecuniary consideration, in case a peace should be concluded.
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginians, on the return of their ambassadors,
concluded a peace with Scipio, on the terms he himself had
prescribed. They then delivered up to him more than five
hundred ships, all which he burnt in sight of Carthage; a
lamentable spectacle to the inhabitants of that ill-fated city!
He struck off the heads of the allies of the Latin name, and
hanged all the Roman citizens who were surrendered up to
him, as deserters.
</p>

<p>
When the time for the payment of the first tribute imposed
by the treaty was expired, as the funds of the government
were exhausted by this long and expensive war; the
difficulty of levying so great a sum, threw the senate into deep
affliction, and many could not refrain even from tears. Hannibal
on this occasion is said to have laughed; and when he
was reproached by Asdrubal Hœdus, for thus insulting his
country in the affliction which he had brought upon it, <q>Were
it possible,</q> says Hannibal, <q>for my heart to be seen, and that
as clearly as my countenance; you would then find that this
laughter which offends so much, flows not from an intemperate
joy, but from a mind almost distracted with the public calamities.
But is this laughter more unseasonable than your
unbecoming tears? Then, then, ought you to have wept,
when your arms were ingloriously taken from you, your ships
burnt, and you were forbidden to engage in any foreign wars.
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
This was the mortal blow which laid us prostrate.&mdash;We are
sensible of the public calamity, so far only as we have a personal
concern in it; and the loss of our money gives us the
most pungent sorrow. Hence it was, that when our city was
made the spoil of the victor; when it was left disarmed and
defenceless amidst so many powerful nations of Africa, who
had at that time taken the field, not a groan, not a sigh was
heard. But now, when you are called on to contribute individually
to the tax imposed upon the state, you bewail and
lament as if all were lost. Alas! I only wish that the subject
of this day's grief does not soon appear to you the least of
your misfortunes.</q>
</p>

<p>
Scipio, after all things were concluded, embarked, in order
to return to Italy. He arrived at Rome, through crowds of
people, whom curiosity had drawn together to behold his
march. The most magnificent triumph that Rome had ever
seen was decreed him, and the surname of Africanus was
bestowed upon this great man; an honour till then unknown,
no person before him having assumed the name of a vanquished
nation. Such was the conclusion of the second Punic war,
after having lasted seventeen years.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3804. A. Carth. 646. A. Rom. 548. Ant. J.C. 200.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>A short Reflection on the Government of Carthage in the
time of the Second Punic War.</hi>&mdash;I shall conclude
the particulars which relate to the second Punic war,
with a reflection of Polybius,<note place='foot'>Lib. vi.
p. 493, 494.</note> which will show the
difference between the two commonwealths of Rome
and Carthage. It may be affirmed, in some measure,
that at the beginning of the second Punic war, and in Hannibal's
time, Carthage was in its decline. The flower of its
youth, and its sprightly vigour were already diminished. It
had begun to fall from its exalted pitch of power, and was
inclining towards its ruin; whereas Rome was then, as it were,
in its bloom and prime of life, and swiftly advancing to the
conquest of the universe. The reason of the declension of
the one, and the rise of the other, is deduced, by Polybius,
from the different form of government established in these
commonwealths, at the time we are now speaking of. At
Carthage, the common people had seized upon the sovereign
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
authority with regard to public affairs, and the advice of their
ancient men or magistrates was no longer listened to; all
affairs were transacted by intrigue and cabal. To take no
notice of the artifices which the faction adverse to Hannibal
employed, during the whole time of his command, to perplex
him; the single instance of burning the Roman vessels during
a truce, a perfidious action to which the common people compelled
the senate to lend their name and assistance, is a proof
of Polybius's assertion. On the contrary, at this very time, the
Romans paid the highest regard to their senate, that is, to a
body composed of the greatest sages; and their old men were
listened to and revered as oracles. It is well known that the
Roman people were exceedingly jealous of their authority, and
especially in whatever related to the election of magistrates.
A century of young men, who by lot were to give the first
vote, which generally directed all the rest, had nominated two
consuls.<note place='foot'>Liv. l. xxiv. n. 8,
9.</note> On the bare remonstrance of Fabius,<note place='foot'>Quilibet
nautarum rectorumque tranquillo mari gubernare potest: Ubi sæva
orta tempestas est, ac turbato mari rapitur vento navis, tum viro et gubernatore opus
est. Non tranquillo navigamus, sed jam aliquot procellis submersi penè sumus.
Itaque quis ad gubernacula sedeat, summâ curâ providendum ac præcavendum
nubis est.&mdash;Trans.</note> who represented
to the people, that in a tempest, like that with which
Rome was then struggling, the ablest pilots ought to be chosen
to steer the vessel of the state, the century returned to their
suffrages, and nominated other consuls. Polybius infers, that
a people, thus guided by the prudence of old men, could not
fail of prevailing over a state which was governed wholly by
the giddy multitude. And indeed, the Romans, under the
guidance of the wise counsels of their senate, gained at last
the superiority with regard to the war considered in general,
though they were defeated in several particular engagements;
and established their power and grandeur on the ruin of their
rivals.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The interval between the Second and Third Punic War.</hi>&mdash;This
interval, though considerable enough with regard to its
duration, since it took up above fifty years, is very little remarkable
as to the events which relate to Carthage. They may
be reduced to two heads; of which the one relates to the person
of Hannibal, and the other to some particular differences
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
between the Carthaginians and Masinissa king of the Numidians.
We shall treat both separately, but at no great length.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sect. I. Continuation of the History of Hannibal.</hi>&mdash;When
the second Punic war was ended, by the treaty of peace
concluded with Scipio, Hannibal, as he himself observed in the
Carthaginian senate, was forty-five years of age. What we
have farther to say of this great man, includes the space of
twenty-five years.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hannibal undertakes and completes the Reformation of the
Courts of Justice, and the Treasury of Carthage.</hi>&mdash;After the
conclusion of the peace, Hannibal, at least at first, was greatly
respected at Carthage, where he filled the first employments of
the state with honour and applause. He headed the Carthaginian
forces in some wars against the Africans:<note place='foot'>Corn. Nep.
<hi rend='italic'>in Annib.</hi> c. 7.</note> but the
Romans, to whom the very name of Hannibal gave uneasiness,
not being able to see him in arms without displeasure, made
complaints on that account, and accordingly he was recalled
to Carthage.
</p>

<p>
On his return he was appointed prætor, which seems to have
been a very considerable employment, and to have conferred
great authority. Carthage is therefore going to be, with regard
to him, a new theatre, as it were, on which he will display virtues
and qualities of a quite different nature from those we have
hitherto admired in him, and which will finish the picture of
this illustrious man.
</p>

<p>
Eagerly desirous of restoring the affairs of his afflicted country
to their former happy condition, he was persuaded, that the
two most powerful methods to make a state flourish, were, an
exact and equal distribution of justice to all its subjects in
general, and a scrupulous fidelity in the management of the
public finances. The former, by preserving an equality among
the citizens, and making them enjoy such a delightful, undisturbed
liberty under the protection of the laws, as fully secures
their honour, their lives, and properties; unites the individuals
of the commonwealth more closely together, and attaches them
more firmly to the state, to which they owe the preservation of
all that is most dear and valuable to them. The latter, by a
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
faithful administration of the public revenues, supplies punctually
the several wants and necessities of the state; keeps in
reserve a never failing resource for sudden emergencies, and
prevents the people from being burthened with new taxes,
which are rendered necessary by extravagant profusion, and
which chiefly contribute to make men harbour an aversion for
the government.
</p>

<p>
Hannibal saw, with great concern, the irregularities which
had crept equally into the administration of justice, and the
management of the finances. Upon his being nominated
prætor, as his love for regularity and order made him uneasy
at every deviation from it, and prompted him to use his utmost
endeavours to restore it; he had the courage to attempt the
reformation of this double abuse, which drew after it a numberless
multitude of others, without dreading, either the animosity
of the old faction that opposed him, or the new enmity
which his zeal for the republic must necessarily draw upon
him.
</p>

<p>
The judges exercised the most flagrant extortion with
impunity.<note place='foot'>Liv. l. xxxiii. n.
46.</note> They were so many petty tyrants, who disposed, in
an arbitrary manner, of the lives and fortunes of the citizens;
without there being the least possibility of putting a stop
to their injustice, because they held their commissions for
life, and mutually supported one another. Hannibal, as prætor,
summoned before his tribunal an officer belonging to the
bench of judges, who openly abused his power. Livy tells us
that he was a questor. This officer, who was of the opposite
faction to Hannibal, and had already assumed all the pride
and haughtiness of the judges, among whom he was to be
admitted at the expiration of his present office, insolently
refused to obey the summons. Hannibal was not of a disposition
to suffer an affront of this nature tamely. Accordingly,
he caused him to be seized by a lictor, and brought him before
an assembly of the people. There, not satisfied with directing
his resentment against this single officer, he impeached the
whole bench of judges; whose insupportable and tyrannical
pride was not restrained, either by the fear of the laws, or a
reverence for the magistrates. And, as Hannibal perceived
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
that he was heard with pleasure, and that the lowest and most
inconsiderable of the people discovered, on this occasion, that
they were no longer able to bear the insolent pride of these
judges, who seemed to have a design upon their liberties; he
proposed a law, (which accordingly passed,) by which it was
enacted, that new judges should be chosen annually; with a
clause, that none should continue in office beyond that term.
This law, at the same time that it acquired him the friendship
and esteem of the people, drew upon him, proportionably, the
hatred of the greatest part of the grandees and nobility.
</p>

<p>
He attempted another reformation, which created him new
enemies, but gained him great honour.<note place='foot'>Liv.
l. xxiii. n. 46, 47.</note> The public revenues
were either squandered away by the negligence of those who
had the management of them, or were plundered by the chief
men of the city and the magistrates; so that, money being
wanting to pay the annual tribute due to the Romans, the
Carthaginians were going to levy it upon the people in general.
Hannibal, entering into a large detail of the public revenues,
ordered an exact estimate of them to be laid before him;
inquired in what manner they had been applied; the employments
and ordinary expenses of the state; and having discovered,
by this inquiry, that the public funds had been in a
great measure embezzled by the fraud of the officers who had
the management of them, he declared and promised, in a full
assembly of the people, that, without laying any new taxes
upon private men, the republic should hereafter be enabled to
pay the tribute to the Romans; and he was as good as his word.
The farmers of the revenues, whose plunder and rapine he had
publicly detected, having accustomed themselves hitherto to
fatten upon the spoils of their country, exclaimed<note place='foot'>Tum
verò isti quos paverat per aliquot annos publicus peculatus, velut bonis
ereptis, non furto eorum manibus extorto, infensi et irati, Romanos in Annibaleim, et
ipsos causam odii quærentes, instigabant. Liv.&mdash;Trans.</note> vehemently
against these regulations, as if their own property had been
forced out of their hands, and not the sums they had plundered
from the public.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Retreat and Death of Hannibal.<note place='foot'>Liv.
l. xxiii. n. 45-49.</note></hi>&mdash;This double reformation
of abuses raised great clamours against Hannibal. His
enemies were writing incessantly to the chief men, or their
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
friends, at Rome, to inform them, that he was carrying on a
secret intelligence with Antiochus king of Syria; that he frequently
received couriers from him; and that this prince had
privately despatched agents to Hannibal, to concert with him
the measures for carrying on the war he was meditating: that
as some animals are so extremely fierce, that it is impossible
ever to tame them; in like manner this man was of so turbulent
and implacable a spirit, that he could not brook ease, and
therefore would, sooner or later, break out again. These informations
were listened to at Rome; and as the transactions of
the preceding war had been begun and carried on almost solely
by Hannibal, they appeared more probable. However, Scipio
strongly opposed the violent measures which the senate were
going to take on their receiving this intelligence, by representing
it as derogatory to the dignity of the Roman people, to
countenance the hatred and accusations of Hannibal's enemies;
to support, with their authority, their unjust passions;
and obstinately to persecute him even in the very heart of his
country; as though the Romans had not humbled him sufficiently,
in driving him out of the field, and forcing him to lay
down his arms.
</p>

<p>
But notwithstanding these prudent remonstrances, the senate
appointed three commissioners to go and make their complaints
to Carthage, and to demand that Hannibal should be
delivered up to them. On their arrival in that city, though
other motives were speciously pretended, yet Hannibal was
perfectly sensible that himself only was aimed at. The evening
being come, he conveyed himself on board a ship, which
he had secretly provided for that purpose; on which occasion
he bewailed his country's fate more than his own. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sæpiùs
patriæ quàm suorum<note place='foot'>It is probable that we should
read <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>suos</foreign>.&mdash;Trans.</note>
eventus miseratus.</foreign> This was the
eighth year after the conclusion of the peace. The first place
he landed at was Tyre, where he was received as in his second
country, and had all the honours paid him which were due to
his exalted merit.
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3812. A. Rom. 556.</note>
After staying some days here, he
set out for Antioch, which the king had lately left,
and from thence waited upon him at Ephesus. The
arrival of so renowned a general gave great pleasure to the
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
king; and did not a little contribute to determine him to
engage in war against Rome; for hitherto he had appeared
wavering and uncertain on that head. In this city, a philosopher,
who was looked upon as the greatest orator of Asia,
had the imprudence to make a long harangue before Hannibal,
on the duties of a general, and the rules of the art-military.<note place='foot'>Cic.
<hi rend='italic'>de Orat.</hi> l. ii. n. 75, 76.</note>
The speech charmed the whole audience. But Hannibal
being asked his opinion of it, <q>I have seen,</q> says he, <q>many
old dotards in my life, but this exceeds them all.</q><note place='foot'>Hìc
Pœnus liberè respondisse fertur, multos se deliros senes sæpe vidisse: Sed
qui magis quàm Phormio deliraret vidisse neminem. Stobæus, <hi rend='italic'>Serm.</hi>
lii. gives the following account of this matter: Ἀννίβας ἀκούσας Στοικοῦ τίνος
ἐπιχειροῦντος, ὅτι ὁ σοφὸς μόνος στρατηγὸς ἐστὶν, ἐγέλασε, νομίζων ἀδύνατον εἶναι
ἐκτὸς τῆς δι᾽ ἔργων ἐμπειρίας τὴν ἐν τούτοις ἑπιστήμην ἔχειν.
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> Hannibal hearing a Stoic philosopher undertake to
prove that the wise man was the only general, laughed, as thinking it impossible for
a man to have any skill in war without having long practised it.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginians, justly fearing that Hannibal's escape
would certainly draw upon them the arms of the Romans, sent
them advice that Hannibal was withdrawn to Antiochus.<note place='foot'>They did
more, for they sent two ships to pursue Hannibal, and bring him back;
they sold off his goods, rased his house; and, by a public decree, declared him an
exile. Such was the gratitude the Carthaginians showed to the greatest general
they ever had. Corn. Nep. <hi rend='italic'>in vitâ Hannib.</hi> c.
7.&mdash;Trans.</note> The
Romans were very much disturbed at this news; and the king
might have turned it extremely to his advantage, had he known
how to make a proper use of it.
</p>

<p>
The first advice that Hannibal gave him at this time, and
which he frequently repeated afterwards, was, to make Italy
the seat of the war.<note place='foot'>Liv. l. xxxiv. n.
60.</note> He required an hundred ships, eleven or
twelve thousand land forces, and offered to take upon himself
the command of the fleet; to cross into Africa, in order to engage
the Carthaginians in the war; and afterwards to make a
descent upon Italy, during which the king himself should remain
in Greece with his army, holding himself constantly in
readiness to cross over into Italy, whenever it should be thought
convenient. This was the only thing proper to be done, and
the king very much approved the proposal at first.
</p>

<p>
Hannibal thought it would be expedient to prepare his
friends at Carthage, in order to engage them the more strongly
in his views.<note place='foot'>Ib. n. 61.</note>
The transmitting of information by letters, is not
only unsafe, but they can give only an imperfect idea of things,
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
and are never sufficiently particular. He therefore despatched
a trusty person with ample instructions to Carthage. This
man was scarce arrived in the city, but his business was
suspected. Accordingly, he was watched and followed: and,
at last, orders were issued for his being seized. However, he
prevented the vigilance of his enemies, and escaped in the
night; after having fixed, in several public places, papers,
which fully declared the occasion of his journey. The senate
immediately sent advice of this to the Romans.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3813. A. Rom. 557.</note>
Villius, one of the deputies who had been sent into Asia,
to inquire into the state of affairs there, and, if
possible, to discover the real designs of Antiochus,
found Hannibal in Ephesus.<note place='foot'>Liv. l. xxxv.
n. 14. Polyb. l. iii. p. 166, 167.</note> He had many conferences
with him, paid him several visits, and speciously affected
to show a particular esteem for him on all occasions. But his
chief aim, by all this designing behaviour, was to make him be
suspected, and to lessen his credit with the king, in which he
succeeded but too well.<note place='foot'>Polybius represents
this application of Villius to Hannibal, as a premeditated
design, in order to render him suspected to Antiochus, because of his intimacy with
a Roman. Livy owns, that the affair succeeded as if it had been designed; but, at
the same time, he gives, for a very obvious reason, another turn to this conversation,
and says, that no more was intended by it, than to sound Hannibal, and to remove
any fears or apprehensions he might be under from the Romans.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
Some authors affirm, that Scipio was joined in this embassy;<note place='foot'>Liv.
l. xxxv. n. 14. Plut. <hi rend='italic'>in vitâ Flamin.</hi> &amp;c.</note>
and they even relate the conversation which that general had
with Hannibal. They tell us, that the Roman having asked
him, who, in his opinion, was the greatest captain that had ever
lived; he answered, Alexander the Great, because, with a
handful of Macedonians, he had defeated numberless armies,
and carried his conquests into countries so very remote, that
it seemed scarce possible for any man only to travel so far.
Being afterwards asked, to whom he gave the second rank;
he answered, to Pyrrhus: Because this king was the first who
understood the art of pitching a camp to advantage; no commander
ever made a more judicious choice of his posts, was
better skilled in drawing up his forces, or was more dexterous
in winning the affection of foreign soldiers; insomuch
that even the people of Italy were more desirous to have him
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
for their governor, though a foreigner, than the Romans themselves,
who had so long been settled in their country. Scipio
proceeding, asked him next, whom he looked upon as the
third: on which Hannibal made no scruple to assign that rank
to himself. Here Scipio could not forbear laughing: <q>But
what would you have said,</q> continued Scipio, <q>had you conquered
me?</q> <q>I would,</q> replied Hannibal, <q>have ranked myself
above Alexander, Pyrrhus, and all the generals the world ever
produced.</q> Scipio was not insensible of so refined and delicate
a flattery, which he no ways expected; and which, by giving
him no rival, seemed to insinuate, that no captain was worthy
of being put in comparison with him.
</p>

<p>
The answer, as told by Plutarch,<note place='foot'>Plut.
<hi rend='italic'>in Pyrrho</hi>, p. 687.</note> is less witty, and not so
probable. In this author, Hannibal gives Pyrrhus the first
place, Scipio the second, and himself the third.
</p>

<p>
Hannibal, sensible of the coldness with which Antiochus
received him, ever since his conferences with Villius or Scipio,
took no notice of it for some time, and seemed insensible of it.<note place='foot'>Liv.
l. xxxv. n. 19.</note>
But at last he thought it advisable to come to an explanation
with the king, and to open his mind freely to him. <q>The
hatred (says he) which I bear to the Romans, is known to the
whole world. I bound myself to it by an oath, from my most
tender infancy. It is this hatred that made me draw the sword
against Rome during thirty-six years. It is that, which, even
in times of peace, has caused me to be driven from my native
country, and forced me to seek an asylum in your dominions.
For ever guided and fired by the same passion, should my hopes
be frustrated here, I will fly to every part of the globe, and
rouse up all nations against the Romans. I hate them, and
will hate them eternally; and know that they bear me no less
animosity. So long as you shall continue in the resolution to
take up arms against them, you may rank Hannibal in the
number of your best friends. But if other counsels incline
you to peace, I declare to you, once for all, address yourself
to others for advice, and not to me.</q> Such a speech, which
came from his heart, and expressed the greatest sincerity, struck
the king, and seemed to remove all his suspicions; so that he
now resolved to give Hannibal the command of part of his fleet.
</p>

<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>

<p>
But what havoc is not flattery capable of making in courts
and in the minds of princes!<note place='foot'>Liv. l. xxxv.
n. 42, 43.</note> Antiochus was told, <q>that it
was imprudent in him to put so much confidence in Hannibal,
an exile, a Carthaginian, whose fortune or genius might suggest
to him, in one day, a thousand different projects: that besides,
this very fame which Hannibal had acquired in war, and which
he considered as his peculiar inheritance, was too great for a
man who fought only under the ensigns of another: that none
but the king ought to be the general and conductor of the war,
and that it was incumbent on him to draw upon himself alone
the eyes and attention of all men; whereas, should Hannibal
be employed, he (a foreigner) would have the glory of all the
successes ascribed to him.</q> <q>No minds,</q><note place='foot'>Nulla
ingenia tam prona ad invidiam sunt, quàm eorum qui genus ac fortunam
suam animis non æquant: Quia virtutem et bonum alienum oderunt. Methinks it
is better to read ut bonum alienum.&mdash;Trans.</note> says Livy, on this
occasion, <q>are more susceptible of envy, than those whose
merit is below their birth and dignity; such persons always
abhorring virtue and worth in others, for this reason alone,
because they are strange and foreign to themselves.</q> This
observation was fully verified on this occasion. Antiochus had
been taken on his weak side; a low and sordid jealousy, which
is the defect and characteristic of little minds, extinguished
every generous sentiment in that monarch. Hannibal was now
slighted and laid aside: however, he was greatly revenged on
Antiochus, by the ill success this prince met with; and showed
how unfortunate that king is whose soul is accessible to envy,
and his ears open to the poisonous insinuation of flatterers.
</p>

<p>
In a council held some time after, to which Hannibal, for
form sake, was admitted, he, when it came to his turn to speak,
endeavoured chiefly to prove, that Philip of Macedon ought,
on any terms, to be engaged to form an alliance with Antiochus,
which was not so difficult as might be imagined.<note place='foot'>Ib.
l. xxxvi. n. 7.</note> <q>With regard,</q>
says Hannibal, <q>to the operations of the war, I adhere immovably
to my first opinion; and had my counsels been listened
to before, Tuscany and Liguria would now be all in a flame:
and Hannibal (a name that strikes terror into the Romans) in
Italy. Though I should not be very well skilled as to other
matters, yet the good and ill success I have met with must
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
necessarily have taught me sufficiently how to carry on a war
against the Romans. I have nothing now in my power, but to
give you my counsel, and offer you my service. May the gods
give success to all your undertakings!</q> Hannibal's speech
was received with applause, but not one of his counsels was
put in execution.
</p>

<p>
Antiochus, imposed upon and lulled asleep by his flatterers,
remained quiet at Ephesus, after the Romans had driven him
out of Greece;<note place='foot'>Liv. l. xxxvi. n.
41.</note> not once imagining that they would ever invade
his dominions. Hannibal, who was now restored to favour,
was for ever assuring him, that the war would soon be removed
into Asia, and that he would soon see the enemy at his gates:
that he must resolve, either to abdicate his throne, or oppose
vigorously a people who grasped at the empire of the world.
This discourse awakened, in some little measure, the king out
of his lethargy, and prompted him to make some weak efforts.
But, as his conduct was unsteady, after sustaining a great
many considerable losses, he was forced to terminate the war
by an ignominious peace; one of the articles of which was,
that he should deliver up Hannibal to the Romans. However,
the latter did not give him opportunity to put it in execution,
but retired to the island of Crete, to consider there what course
it would be best for him to take.
</p>

<p>
The riches he had brought along with him, of which the
people of the island got some notice, had like to have proved
his ruin.<note place='foot'>Corn. Nep. <hi rend='italic'>in Annib.</hi>
c. 9, 10. Justin, l. xxxii. c. 4.</note> Hannibal was never wanting in stratagems, and he
had occasion to employ them now, to save both himself and
his treasure. He filled several vessels with molten lead, the
tops of which he just covered over with gold and silver. These
he deposited in the temple of Diana, in presence of several
Cretans, to whose honesty, he said, he confided all his treasure.
A strong guard was then posted round the temple, and Hannibal
left at full liberty, from a supposition that his riches
were secured.
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3820. A. Rom. 564.</note>
But he had concealed them in hollow statues
of brass,<note place='foot'>These statues were
thrown out by him, in a place of public resort, as things of
little value. Corn. Nep.&mdash;Trans.</note> which he always carried along with him.
And then, embracing a favourable opportunity to
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
make his escape, he fled to the court of Prusias, king of
Bithynia.<note place='foot'>Corn. Nep. <hi rend='italic'>in
Annib.</hi> c. 10, 11. Justin, l. xxxiii c. 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
It appears from history, that he made some stay in the court
of this prince, who soon engaged in war with Eumenes, king
of Pergamus, a professed friend to the Romans. By means of
Hannibal, the troops of Prusias gained several victories both
by land and sea.
</p>

<p>
He employed a stratagem of an extraordinary kind, in a
sea-fight.<note place='foot'>Justin, l. xxxii. c. 4. Corn. Nep.
<hi rend='italic'>in vit. Annib.</hi></note> As the enemy's fleet consisted of more
ships than his, he had recourse to artifice. He put into earthen vessels
all kinds of serpents, and ordered these vessels to be thrown
into the enemy's ships. His chief aim was to destroy Eumenes;
and for that purpose it was necessary for him to find out which
ship he was on board of. This Hannibal discovered by sending
out a boat, upon pretence of conveying a letter to him. Having
gained his point thus far, he ordered the commanders of
the respective vessels to direct their attack principally against
Eumenes's ship. They obeyed, and would have taken it, had
he not outsailed his pursuers. The rest of the ships of Pergamus
sustained the fight with great vigour, till the earthen vessels
had been thrown into them. At first they only laughed at
this, and were very much surprised to find such weapons
employed against them. But when they saw themselves surrounded
with the serpents, which darted out of these vessels
when they flew to pieces, they were seized with dread, retired
in disorder, and yielded the victory to the enemy.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3882. A. Rom. 566.</note>
Services of so important a nature seemed to secure for
ever to Hannibal an undisturbed asylum at that
prince's court.<note place='foot'>Liv. l. xxxix. n.
51.</note> However, the Romans would not
suffer him to be easy there, but deputed Q. Flamininus
to Prusias, to complain of the protection he gave Hannibal.
The latter easily guessed the motive of this embassy, and therefore
did not wait till his enemies had an opportunity of delivering
him up. At first he attempted to secure himself by flight;
but perceiving that the seven secret outlets, which he had contrived
in his palace, were all seized by the soldiers of Prusias,
who, by perfidiously betraying his guest, was desirous of making
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
his court to the Romans; he ordered the poison, which he had
long kept for this melancholy occasion, to be brought him; and
taking it in his hand, <q>Let us,</q> said he, <q>free the Romans from
the disquiet with which they have so long been tortured, since
they have not patience to wait for an old man's death. The
victory which Flamininus gains over a man disarmed and
betrayed will not do him much honour. This single day will
be a lasting testimony of the great degeneracy of the Romans.
Their fathers sent notice to Pyrrhus, to desire he would beware
of a traitor who intended to poison him, and that at a time
when this prince was at war with them in the very centre of
Italy; but their sons have deputed a person of consular dignity
to spirit up Prusias, impiously to murder one who is not
only his friend, but his guest.</q> After calling down curses
upon Prusias, and having invoked the gods, the protectors and
avengers of the sacred rights of hospitality, he swallowed the
poison,<note place='foot'>Plutarch, according to
his custom, assigns him three different deaths. Some, says he,
relate, <q>that having wrapped his cloak about his neck, he ordered his servant
to fix his knees against his buttocks, and not to leave twisting till he had
strangled him.</q> Others say, that, in imitation of Themistocles and Midas, he drank
bull's blood. Livy tells us, that Hannibal drank a poison which he always carried
about him; and taking the cup into his hands, cried, <q>Let us free,</q>
&amp;c. In <hi rend='italic'>vitâ Flaminini</hi>.&mdash;Trans.</note>
and died at seventy years of age.
</p>

<p>
This year was remarkable for the death of three great men,
Hannibal, Philopœmen, and Scipio, who had this in common,
that they all died out of their native countries, by a death little
correspondent to the glory of their actions. The two first died
by poison: Hannibal being betrayed by his host; and Philopœmen
being taken prisoner in a battle against the Messenians,
and thrown into a dungeon, was forced to swallow poison. As
to Scipio, he banished himself, to avoid an unjust prosecution
which was carrying on against him at Rome, and ended his
days in a kind of obscurity.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Character and Eulogium of Hannibal.</hi>&mdash;This would be
the proper place for representing the excellent qualities of
Hannibal, who reflected so much glory on Carthage. But as
I have attempted to draw his character elsewhere,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Of
the Method of Studying and Teaching the Belles Lettres</hi>, vol.
ii.&mdash;Trans.</note> and to give
a just idea of him, by making a comparison between him and
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
Scipio, I think myself dispensed from giving his eulogium at
large in this place.
</p>

<p>
Persons who devote themselves to the profession of arms,
cannot spend too much time in the study of this great man,
who is looked upon, by the best judges, as the most complete
general, in almost every respect, that ever the world produced.
</p>

<p>
During the whole seventeen years that the war lasted, two
errors only are objected to him: first, his not marching, immediately
after the battle of Cannæ, his victorious army to
Rome, in order to besiege that city: secondly, his suffering
their courage to be softened and enervated during their winter-quarters
in Capua: errors, which only show that great men
are not so in all things;<note place='foot'>Quintil.&mdash;Trans.</note>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>summi enim sunt, homine tamen</foreign>;
and which, perhaps, may be partly excused.
</p>

<p>
But then, for these two errors, what a multitude of shining
qualities appear in Hannibal! How extensive were his views
and designs, even in his most tender years! What greatness
of soul! What intrepidity! What presence of mind must he
have possessed, to be able, even in the fire and heat of action,
to turn every thing to advantage! With what surprising
address must he have managed the minds of men, that, amidst
so great a variety of nations which composed his army, who
often were in want both of money and provisions, his camp
was not once disturbed with any insurrection, either against
himself or any of his generals! With what equity, what moderation
must he have behaved towards his new allies, to have
prevailed so far as to attach them inviolably to his service,
though he was reduced to the necessity of making them sustain
almost the whole burthen of the war, by quartering his army
upon them, and levying contributions in their several countries!
In short, how fruitful must he have been in expedients, to be
able to carry on, for so many years, a war in a remote country,
in spite of the violent opposition made by a powerful faction
at home, which refused him supplies of every kind, and thwarted
him on all occasions; it may be affirmed, that Hannibal,
during the whole series of this war, seemed the only prop of
the state, and the soul of every part of the empire of the
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
Carthaginians, who could never believe themselves conquered,
till Hannibal confessed that he himself was so.
</p>

<p>
But our acquaintance with Hannibal will be very imperfect,
if we consider him only at the head of armies. The particulars
we learn from history, concerning the secret intelligence he
held with Philip of Macedon; the wise counsels he gave to
Antiochus, king of Syria; the double reformation he introduced
in Carthage, with regard to the management of the public
revenues and the administration of justice, prove, that he was
a great statesman in every respect. So superior and universal
was his genius, that it took in all parts of government; and
so great were his natural abilities, that he was capable of
acquitting himself in all the various functions of it with glory.
Hannibal shone as conspicuously in the cabinet as in the field;
equally able to fill the civil as the military employments. In
a word, he united in his own person the different talents and
merits of all professions, the sword, the gown, and the finances.
</p>

<p>
He had some learning, and though he was so much employed
in military labours, and engaged in so many wars, he,
however, found some leisure to devote to literature.<note place='foot'>Atque
hic tantus vir, tantisque bellis districtus, nonnibil temporis tribuit litteris,
&amp;c. Corn. Nep <hi rend='italic'>in vitá Annib.</hi> cap. 13.&mdash;Trans.</note>
Several smart repartees of Hannibal, which have been transmitted to
us, show that he had a great fund of natural wit; and this he
improved by the most polite education that could be bestowed
at that time, and in such a republic as Carthage. He spoke
Greek tolerably well, and even wrote some books in that
language. His preceptor was a Lacedæmonian, named Sosilus,
who, with Philenius, another Lacedæmonian, accompanied him
in all his expeditions. Both these undertook to write the
history of this renowned warrior.
</p>

<p>
With regard to his religion and moral conduct, he was not
altogether so profligate and wicked as he is represented by
Livy:<note place='foot'>Lib. xxi. n, 4.</note> <q>cruel even to inhumanity, more
perfidious than a Carthaginian; regardless of truth, of probity, of the sacred ties
of oaths; fearless of the gods, and utterly void of religion.</q>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Inhumana crudelitas, perfida plusquam Punica; nihil veri,
nihil sancti, nullus deúm metus, nullum jusjurandum, nulla
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
religio.</foreign> According to Polybius,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Excerpt.
è</hi> Polyb. p. 33.</note> he rejected a barbarous proposal
that was made him before he entered Italy, which was,
to eat human flesh, at a time when his army was in absolute
want of provisions. Some years after, so far from treating
with barbarity, as he was advised to do, the dead body of
Sempronius Gracchus, which Mago had sent him, he caused
his funeral obsequies to be solemnized in presence of the whole
army.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Excerpt. è</hi> Diod.
p. 282. Liv. l. xxv. n. 17.</note> We have seen him, on many occasions, evince the
highest reverence for the gods; and Justin,<note place='foot'>Lib. xxxii. c. 4.</note>
who copied Trogus Pompeius, an author worthy of credit, observes, that
he always showed uncommon moderation and continence, with
regard to the great number of women taken by him during the
course of so long a war; insomuch that no one would have
imagined he had been born in Africa, where incontinence is
the predominant vice of the country. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pudicitiamque eum
tantam inter tot captivas habuisse, ut in Africa natum quivis
negaret.</foreign>
</p>

<p>
His disregard of wealth, at a time when he had so many
opportunities to enrich himself by the plunder of the cities he
stormed, and the nations he subdued, shows that he knew the
true and genuine use which a general ought to make of riches,
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> to gain the affection of his soldiers, and to attach his
allies to his interest, by diffusing his beneficence on proper occasions,
and not being sparing in his rewards: a quality very essential,
and at the same time as uncommon, in a commander. The
only use Hannibal made of money was to purchase success;
firmly persuaded, that a man who is at the head of affairs is
sufficiently recompensed by the glory derived from victory.
</p>

<p>
He always led a very regular, austere life;<note place='foot'><p>Cibi potionisque,
desiderio naturali, non voluptate, modus finitus. Liv. l. xxi. n. 4.
</p>
<p>
Constat Annibalem, nec tum cùm Romano tonantem bello Italia contremuit, nec
cùm reversus Carthaginem summum imperium tenuit, aut cubantem cœnâsse, aut
plus quàm sextario vini indulsisse. Justin, l. xxxii. c. 4.&mdash;Trans.</p></note>
and even in times of peace, and in the midst of Carthage, when he was
invested with the first dignity of the city, we are told that he
never used to recline himself on a bed at meals, as was the
custom in those ages, and that he drank but very little wine.
So regular and uniform a life may serve as an illustrious
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
example to our commanders, who often include, among the
privileges of war and the duty of officers, the keeping of splendid
tables, and living luxuriously.
</p>

<p>
I do not, however, pretend altogether to exculpate Hannibal
from all the errors with which he is charged. Though he
possessed an assemblage of the most exalted qualities, it
cannot be denied but that he had some little tincture of the
vices of his country; and that it would be difficult to excuse
some actions and circumstances of his life. Polybius
observes,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Except é</hi> Polyb. p. 34 &amp; 37.</note>
that Hannibal was accused of avarice in Carthage, and
of cruelty in Rome. He adds, on the same occasion, that
people were very much divided in opinion concerning him;
and it would be no wonder, as he had made himself so many
enemies in both cities, that they should have drawn him in disadvantageous
colours. But Polybius is of opinion, that though
it should be taken for granted, that all the defects with which
he is charged are true; yet that they were not so much owing
to his nature and disposition, as to the difficulties with which
he was surrounded, in the course of so long and laborious a
war; and to the complacency he was obliged to show to the
general officers, whose assistance he absolutely wanted, for the
execution of his various enterprises; and whom he was not
always able to restrain, any more than he could the soldiers
who fought under them.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sect. II. Dissensions between the Carthaginians and
Masinissa, King of Numidia.</hi>&mdash;Among the conditions of the
peace granted to the Carthaginians, there was one which
enacted, that they should restore to Masinissa all the territories
and cities he possessed before the war; and further,
Scipio, to reward the zeal and fidelity which that monarch had
shown towards the Romans, had added to his dominions those
of Syphax. This present afterwards gave rise to disputes
and quarrels between the Carthaginians and Numidians.
</p>

<p>
These two princes, Syphax and Masinissa, were both kings
in Numidia, but reigned over different nations. The subjects
of Syphax were called Masæsuli, and their capital was Cirtha.
Those of Masinissa were the Massyli: but they are better
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
known by the name of Numidians, which was common to them
both. Their principal strength consisted in their cavalry.
They always rode without saddles, and some even without
bridles, whence Virgil<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Æn.</hi> l. iv.
ver. 41.&mdash;Trans.</note> calls them <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Numidæ
infræni</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
In the beginning of the second Punic war,<note place='foot'>Liv. l. xxiv. n.
48, 49.</note> Syphax siding
with the Romans, Gala, the father of Masinissa, to check the
career of so powerful a neighbour, thought it his interest to
join the Carthaginians, and accordingly sent out against Syphax
a powerful army under the conduct of his son, at that
time but seventeen years of age. Syphax, being overcome in
a battle, in which it is said he lost thirty thousand men, escaped
into Mauritania. However, the face of things was afterwards
greatly changed.
</p>

<p>
Masinissa, after his father's death, was often reduced to the
brink of ruin;<note place='foot'>Id. l. xxix. n.
29-34.</note> being driven from his kingdom by an usurper;
pursued warmly by Syphax; in danger every instant of falling
into the hands of his enemies; destitute of forces, money, and
of every resource. He was at that time in alliance with the
Romans, and the friend of Scipio, with whom he had had an
interview in Spain. His misfortunes would not permit him to
bring great succours to that general. When Lælius arrived in
Africa, Masinissa joined him with a few horse, and from that
time continued inviolably attached to the Roman interest.
Syphax, on the contrary, having married the famous Sophonisba,
daughter of Asdrubal, went over to the Carthaginians.<note place='foot'>Id.
l. xxix. n. 23.</note>
</p>

<p>
The fate of these two princes again changed, but the
change was now final.<note place='foot'>Id. l. xxx n.
11, 12.</note> Syphax lost a great battle, and was
taken alive by the enemy. Masinissa, the victor, besieged
Cirtha, his capital, and took it. But he met with a greater
danger in that city than he had faced in the field, and this
was Sophonisba, whose charms and endearments he was unable
to resist. To secure this princess to himself, he married her,
but a few days after, he was obliged to send her a dose of
poison, as her nuptial present; this being the only way that he
could devise to keep his promise with his queen, and preserve
her from the power of the Romans.
</p>

<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>

<p>
This was a considerable error in itself, and one that could
not fail to disoblige a nation that was so jealous of its authority:
but this young prince gloriously made amends for his fault, by
the signal services he afterwards rendered to Scipio. We
observed, that after the defeat and capture of Syphax, the
dominions of this prince were bestowed upon him;<note place='foot'>Liv. l. xxx.
n. 44.</note> and that the
Carthaginians were forced to restore all he possessed before.
This gave rise to the divisions which we are now going to
relate.
</p>

<p>
A territory situated towards the sea-side, near the lesser
Syrtis, was the subject of the dispute.<note place='foot'>Id.
l. xxxiv. n. 62.</note> The country was very
rich, and the soil extremely fruitful; a proof of which is, that
the city of Leptis alone, which belonged to that territory, paid
daily a talent to the Carthaginians, by way of tribute. Masinissa
had seized part of this territory. Each side despatched
deputies to Rome, to plead the cause of their respective superiors
before the senate. This assembly thought proper to send
Scipio Africanus, with two other commissioners, to examine
the controversy upon the spot. However, they returned without
coming to any decision, and left the business in the same
uncertain state in which they had found it. Possibly they
acted in this manner by order of the senate, and had received
private instructions to favour Masinissa, who was then possessed
of the district in question.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3823. A. Rom. 567.</note>
Ten years after, new commissioners having been appointed
to examine the same affair, they acted as the former
had done, and left the whole undetermined.<note place='foot'>Id. l. xl. n. 17.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3833. A. Rom. 577.</note>
After the like distance of time, the Carthaginians again
brought their complaint before the senate, but with
greater importunity than before.<note place='foot'>Id. l.
xlii. n. 23, 24.</note> They represented,
that besides the lands at first contested, Masinissa
had, during the two preceding years, dispossessed them of
upwards of seventy towns and castles: their hands were bound
up by that article of the last treaty, which forbade their making
war upon any of the allies of the Romans: that they could
no longer bear the insolence, the avarice, and cruelty of that
prince: that they were deputed to Rome with three requests,
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
(one of which they desired might be immediately complied
with,) <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> either that the affair might be examined and decided
by the senate; or, secondly, that they might be permitted to
repel force by force, and defend themselves by arms; or,
lastly, that, if favour was to prevail over justice, they then
entreated the Romans to specify once for all, which of the
Carthaginian lands they were desirous should be given up to
Masinissa, that they, by this means, might hereafter know what
they had to depend on, and that the Roman people would
show some moderation in their behalf, at a time that this prince
set no other bounds to his pretensions, than his insatiable
avarice. The deputies concluded with beseeching the Romans,
that if they had any cause of complaint against the Carthaginians
since the conclusion of the last peace, that they themselves
would punish them; and not to give them up to the
wild caprice of a prince, by whom their liberties were made
precarious, and their lives insupportable. After ending their
speech, being pierced with grief, shedding floods of tears, they
fell prostrate upon the earth; a spectacle that moved all who
were present to compassion, and raised a violent hatred against
Masinissa. Gulussa, his son, who was then present, being
asked what he had to reply, he answered, that his father had
not given him any instructions, not knowing that any thing
would be laid to his charge. He only desired the senate to
reflect, that the circumstance which drew all this hatred upon
him from the Carthaginians, was, the inviolable fidelity with
which he had always been attached to the side of the Romans.
The senate, after hearing both sides, answered, that they were
inclined to do justice to either party to whom it might be due:
that Gulussa should set out immediately with their orders to
his father, who was thereby commanded to send immediately
deputies with those of Carthage; that they would do all that
lay in their power to serve him, but not to the prejudice of the
Carthaginians: that it was but just the ancient limits should be
preserved; and that it was far from being the intention of the
Romans, to have the Carthaginians dispossessed, during the
peace, of those territories and cities which had been left them
by the treaty. The deputies of both powers were then dismissed
with the usual presents.
</p>

<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>

<p>
But all these assurances were but mere words.<note place='foot'>Polyb.
p. 951.</note> It is plain
that the Romans did not once endeavour to satisfy the Carthaginians,
or do them the least justice; and that they protracted
the business, on purpose to give Masinissa time to establish
himself in his usurpation, and weaken his enemies.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3848. A. Rom. 592.</note>
A new deputation was sent to examine the affair upon the
spot, and Cato was one of the commissioners.<note place='foot'>App.
<hi rend='italic'>de bell. Pun.</hi> p. 37.</note> On
their arrival, they asked the parties if they were
willing to abide by their determination. Masinissa
readily complied. The Carthaginians answered, that they had
fixed a rule to which they adhered, and that this was the treaty
which had been concluded by Scipio, and desired that their
cause might be examined with all possible rigour. They therefore
could not come to any decision. The deputies visited all
the country, and found it in a very good condition, especially
the city of Carthage: and they were surprised to see it, after
having been involved in such a calamity, so soon again
raised to so exalted a pitch of power and grandeur. The deputies,
on their return, did not fail to acquaint the senate with
this circumstance; and declared, Rome could never be in
safety, so long as Carthage should subsist. From this time,
whatever affair was debated in the senate, Cato always added
the following words to his opinion, <q>and I conclude that Carthage
ought to be destroyed.</q> This grave senator did not give
himself the trouble to prove, that bare jealousy of the growing
power of a neighbouring state, is a warrant sufficient for destroying
a city, contrary to the faith of treaties. Scipio Nasica
on the other hand, was of opinion, that the ruin of this city
would draw after it that of their commonwealth; because that
the Romans, having then no rival to fear, would quit the
ancient severity of their manners, and abandon themselves to
luxury and pleasures, the never-failing subverters of the most
flourishing empires.
</p>

<p>
In the mean time, divisions broke out in Carthage.<note place='foot'>App.
p. 38.</note> The popular faction, being now become superior to that of the grandees
and senators, sent forty citizens into banishment; and
bound the people by an oath, never to suffer the least mention
to be made of recalling those exiles. They withdrew to the
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
court of Masinissa, who despatched Gulussa and Micipsa, his
two sons, to Carthage, to solicit their recall. However, the
gates of the city were shut against them, and one of them was
closely pursued by Hamilcar, one of the generals of the republic.
This gave occasion to a new war, and accordingly armies
were levied on both sides. A battle was fought; and the
younger Scipio, who afterwards ruined Carthage, was spectator
of it. He had been sent from Lucullus, who was then carrying
on war in Spain, and under whom Scipio then served, to
Masinissa, to desire some elephants from that monarch.
During the whole engagement, he stood upon a neighbouring
hill; and was surprised to see Masinissa, then upwards of
eighty years of age, mounted (agreeably to the custom of his
country) on a horse without a saddle; flying from rank to
rank like a young officer, and sustaining the most arduous toils.
The fight was very obstinate, and continued from morning till
night, but at last the Carthaginians gave way. Scipio used to
say afterwards, that he had been present at many battles, but
at none with so much pleasure as at this; having never before
beheld so formidable an army engage, without any danger or
trouble to himself. And being very conversant in the writings
of Homer, he added, that till his time, there were but two more
who had had the pleasure of being spectators of such an action,
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> Jupiter from mount Ida, and Neptune from Samothrace,
when the Greeks and Trojans fought before Troy. I know
not whether the sight of a hundred thousand men (for so many
there were) butchering one another, can administer a real
pleasure; or whether such a pleasure is consistent with the
sentiments of humanity, so natural to mankind.
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginians, after the battle was over, entreated
Scipio to terminate their contests with Masinissa.<note place='foot'>App.
<hi rend='italic'>de bell. Pun.</hi> 40.</note> Accordingly,
he heard both parties, and the Carthaginians consented
to yield up the territory of Emporium,<note place='foot'>Emporium,
or Emporia, was a country of Africa, on the Lesser Syrtis, in which
Leptis stood. No part of the Carthaginian dominions was more fruitful than this.
Polybius, l. i. says, that the revenue that arose from this place was so considerable,
that all their hopes were almost founded on it, ἐν ἁῖς (<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>
their revenues from Emporia) εἶχον τὰς μεγίστας ἔλπιδας. To this was owing their care
and state-jealousy above mentioned, lest the Romans should sail beyond the Fair
Promontory, that lay before Carthage; and become acquainted with a country which might
induce them to attempt the conquest of it.&mdash;Trans.</note> which had been the
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
first cause of the dispute, to pay Masinissa two hundred talents
of silver down, and eight hundred more, at such times as
should be agreed. But Masinissa insisting on the return of
the exiles, and the Carthaginians being unwilling to agree to
this proposition, they did not come to any decision. Scipio,
after having paid his compliments, and returned thanks to
Masinissa, set out with the elephants for which he had been sent.
</p>

<p>
The king, immediately after the battle was over, had
blocked up the enemy's camp, which was pitched upon a hill,
whither neither troops nor provisions could come to them.<note place='foot'>App.
<hi rend='italic'>de bell. Pun.</hi> 40.</note>
During this interval, there arrived deputies from Rome, with
orders from the senate to decide the quarrel, in case the king
should be defeated; otherwise, to leave it undetermined, and
to give the king the strongest assurances of the continuation
of their friendship; and they complied with the latter injunction.
In the mean time, the famine daily increased in the enemy's
camp; and to add to their calamity, it was followed by a
plague, which made dreadful havoc. Being now reduced to
the last extremity, they surrendered to Masinissa, promising to
deliver up the deserters, to pay him five thousand talents of
silver in fifty years, and restore the exiles, notwithstanding
their oaths to the contrary. They all submitted to the ignominious
ceremony of passing under the yoke,<note place='foot'>Ils furent
tous passés sous le joug: Sub jugum missi; a kind of gallows (made
by two forked sticks, standing upright) was erected, and a spear laid across, under
which vanquished enemies were obliged to pass. Festus.&mdash;Trans.</note>
and were dismissed, with only one suit of clothes for each. Gulussa, to
satiate his vengeance for the ill treatment which, as we before
observed, he had met with, sent out against them a body of
cavalry, whom, from their great weakness, they could neither
escape nor resist. So that of fifty-eight thousand men, very
few returned to Carthage.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3855. A. Carth. 697. A. Rom. 599. Ant. J.C. 149.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>The Third Punic War.</hi>&mdash;The third Punic war, which was
less considerable than either of the two former, with
regard to the number and greatness of the battles,
and its continuance, which was only four years, was
still more remarkable with respect to the success and
event of it, as it ended in the total ruin and destruction
of Carthage.
</p>

<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>

<p>
The inhabitants of this city, from their last defeat, knew
what they had to fear from the Romans, who had uniformly
displayed great ill-will towards them, as often as they had
addressed them upon their disputes with Masinissa.<note place='foot'>Appian,
p. 41, 42.</note> To prevent the consequences of it, the Carthaginians, by a decree of
the senate, impeached Asdrubal, general of the army, and
Carthalo, commander of the auxiliary<note place='foot'>The foreign forces were
commanded by leaders of their respective nations, who were all under the command of
a Carthaginian officer, called by Appian Βοήθαρχος.&mdash;Trans.</note> forces, as
guilty of high treason, for being the authors of the war against the king
of Numidia. They then sent a deputation to Rome, to inquire
what opinion that republic entertained of their late proceedings,
and what was desired of them. The deputies were coldly
answered, that it was the business of the senate and people of
Carthage to know what satisfaction was due to the Romans.
A second deputation bringing them no clearer answer, they
fell into the greatest dejection; and being seized with the
strongest terrors, from the recollection of their past sufferings,
they fancied the enemy was already at their gates, and imagined
to themselves all the dismal consequences of a long
siege, and of a city taken sword in hand.
</p>

<p>
In the mean time, the senate debated at Rome on the
measures it would be proper for them to take; and the disputes
between Cato the elder and Scipio Nasica, who entertained
totally different opinions on this subject, were renewed.<note place='foot'>Plut.
<hi rend='italic'>in vit. Cat.</hi> p. 352.</note>
The former, on his return from Africa, had declared, in the
strongest terms, that he had found Carthage, not as the
Romans supposed it to be, exhausted of men or money, or in
a weak and humble state; but, on the contrary, that it was
crowded with vigorous young men, abounded with immense
quantities of gold and silver, and prodigious magazines of arms
and all warlike stores; and was so haughty and confident on
account of this force, that their hopes and ambition had no
bounds. It is farther said, that after he had ended his speech,
he threw, out of the lappet of his robe, in the midst of the
senate, some African figs; and, as the senators admired their
beauty and size, <q>Know,</q> says he, <q>that it is but three days
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
since these figs were gathered. Such is the distance between
the enemy and us.</q><note place='foot'>Plin. l. xv. c. 18.</note>
</p>

<p>
Cato and Nasica had each of them their reasons for voting
as they did.<note place='foot'>Plut. ibid. <hi rend='italic'>in
vitâ Cat.</hi></note> Nasica, observing that the people had risen to
such a height of insolence, as led them into excesses of every
kind; that their prosperity had swelled them with a pride
which the senate itself was not able to check; and that their
power was become so enormous, that they were able to draw
the city, by force, into every mad design they might undertake;
Nasica, I say, observing this, was desirous that they should
continue in fear of Carthage, in order that this might serve as
a curb to restrain and check their audacious conduct. For it
was his opinion, that the Carthaginians were too weak to subdue
the Romans; and at the same time too strong to be considered
by them in a contemptible light. With regard to Cato,
he thought that as his countrymen were become haughty and
insolent by success, and plunged headlong into profligacy of
every kind; nothing could be more dangerous, than for them
to have for a rival and an enemy, a city that till now had been
powerful, but was become, even by its misfortunes, more wise
and provident than ever; and not to remove the fears of the
inhabitants entirely with regard to a foreign power; since they
had, within their own walls, all the opportunities of indulging
themselves in excesses of every kind.
</p>

<p>
To lay aside, for one instant, the laws of equity, I leave the
reader to determine which of these two great men reasoned
most justly, according to the maxims of sound policy, and the
true interest of a state. One undoubted circumstance is, that
all historians have observed that there was a sensible change in
the conduct and government of the Romans, immediately after
the ruin of Carthage:<note place='foot'><p>Ubi Carthago,
et æmula imperii Romani ab stirpe interiit, Fortuna sævire ac
miscere omnia cœpit. Sallust. <hi rend='italic'>in bell. Catilin.</hi>
</p>
<p>
Ante Carthaginem deletam populus et senatus Romanus placidè modestéque inter
se Remp. tractabant.&mdash;Metus hostilis in bonis artibus civitatem retinebat. Sed ubi
formido illa mentibus decessit, illicet ea, quæ secundæ res amant, lascivia atquæ
superbia incessere. Idem <hi rend='italic'>in bello
Jugurthino</hi>.&mdash;Trans.</p></note> that vice no longer made its way into
Rome with a timorous pace, and as it were by stealth, but
appeared barefaced, and seized, with astonishing rapidity, upon
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
all orders of the republic: that the senators, plebeians, in a
word, all conditions, abandoned themselves to luxury and
voluptuousness, without moderation or sense of decency, which
occasioned, as it must necessarily, the ruin of the state. <q>The
first Scipio,</q><note place='foot'>Potentiæ Romanorum prior
Scipio viam aperuerat, luxuriæ posterior aperuit. Quippe remoto Carthaginis
metu, sublatàque imperii æmulà, non gradu, sed præcipiti cursu à virtute
descitum, ad vitia transcursum. Vel. Paterc. l. ii. c. 1.&mdash;Trans.</note>
says Paterculus, speaking of the Romans, <q>had
laid the foundations of their future grandeur; and the last, by
his conquests, opened a door to all manner of luxury and dissoluteness.
For, after Carthage, which obliged Rome to stand
for ever on its guard, by disputing empire with that city, had
been totally destroyed, the depravity of manners was no longer
slow in its progress, but swelled at once into the utmost excess
of corruption.</q>
</p>

<p>
Be this as it may, the senate resolved to declare war
against the Carthaginians; and the reasons or pretences urged
for it were, their having maintained ships contrary to the tenour
of the treaty; their having sent an army out of their territories,
against a prince who was in alliance with Rome, and whose
son they had treated ill, at the time that he was accompanied
by a Roman ambassador.<note place='foot'>App. p. 42.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3856. A. Rom. 600.</note>
An event, that chance occasioned to happen very fortunately,
at the time that the senate of Rome was debating
on the affair of Carthage, doubtless contributed
very much to make them take that resolution.<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>
This was the arrival of deputies from Utica, who came to surrender
up themselves, their effects, their lands, and their city,
into the hands of the Romans. Nothing could have happened
more seasonably. Utica was the second city of Africa,
vastly rich, and had a port equally spacious and commodious;
it stood within sixty furlongs of Carthage, so that it might
serve as a place of arms in the attack of that city. The
Romans now hesitated no longer, but formally proclaimed war.
M. Manilius, and L. Marcius Censorinus, the two consuls,
were desired to set out as soon as possible. They had secret
orders from the senate, not to end the war but by the
destruction of Carthage. The consuls immediately left Rome,
and stopped at Lilybæum in Sicily. They had a considerable
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
fleet, on board of which were fourscore thousand foot, and
about four thousand horse.
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginians were not yet acquainted with the resolutions
which had been taken at Rome.<note place='foot'>Polyb.
<hi rend='italic'>excerpt. legat.</hi>. p. 972</note> The answer brought
back by their deputies, had only increased their fears, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> <q>It
was the business of the Carthaginians to consider what satisfaction
was due to them.</q><note place='foot'>To the Romans.&mdash;Trans.</note>
This made them not know what course to take. At last they sent new deputies, whom they
invested with full powers to act as they should see fitting; and
even (what the former wars could never make them stoop to)
to declare, that the Carthaginians gave up themselves, and all
they possessed, to the will and pleasure of the Romans. This,
according to the import of the clause, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>se suaque eorum
arbitrio permittere</foreign>, was submitting themselves, without reserve, to the
power of the Romans, and acknowledging themselves their
vassals. Nevertheless, they did not expect any great success
from this condescension, though so very mortifying; because,
as the Uticans had been beforehand with them on that occasion,
this circumstance had deprived them of the merit of a
ready and voluntary submission.
</p>

<p>
The deputies, on their arrival at Rome, were informed that
war had been proclaimed, and that the army was set out. The
Romans had despatched a courier to Carthage, with the decree
of the senate; and to inform that city, that the Roman fleet
had sailed. The deputies had therefore no time for deliberation,
but delivered up themselves, and all they possessed, to
the Romans. In consequence of this behaviour, they were
answered, that since they had at last taken a right step, the
senate granted them their liberty, the enjoyment of their laws,
and all their territories and other possessions, whether public
or private, provided that, within the space of thirty days, they
should send, as hostages, to Lilybæum, three hundred young
Carthaginians of the first distinction, and comply with the
orders of the consuls. This last condition filled them with
inexpressible anxiety: but the concern they were under would
not allow them to make the least reply, or to demand an
explanation; nor, indeed, would it have been to any purpose.
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
They therefore set out for Carthage, and there gave an account
of their embassy.
</p>

<p>
All the articles of the treaty were extremely severe with
regard to the Carthaginians; but the silence of the Romans,
with respect to the cities of which no notice was taken in the
concessions which that people was willing to make, perplexed
them exceedingly.<note place='foot'>Polyb. <hi rend='italic'>excerpt.
legat.</hi> p. 972.</note> But all they had to do was to obey. After
the many former and recent losses which the Carthaginians
had sustained, they were by no means in a condition to resist
such an enemy, since they had not been able to oppose Masinissa.
Troops, provisions, ships, allies, in a word, every thing
was wanting, and hope and vigour more than all the rest.
</p>

<p>
They did not think it proper to wait till the thirty days,
which had been allowed them, were expired, but immediately
sent their hostages, in hopes of softening the enemy by the
readiness of their obedience, though they dared not flatter
themselves with the expectation of meeting with favour on this
occasion. These hostages were the flower, and the only hopes,
of the noblest families of Carthage. Never was any spectacle
more moving; nothing was now heard but cries, nothing seen
but tears, and all places echoed with groans and lamentations.
But above all, the disconsolate mothers, bathed in tears, tore
their dishevelled hair, beat their breasts, and, as if grief and
despair had distracted them, they yelled in such a manner as
might have moved the most savage breasts to compassion.
But the scene was much more mournful, when the fatal moment
of their separation was come; when, after having accompanied
their dear children to the ship, they bid them a long
last farewell, persuaded that they should never see them more;
bathed them with their tears; embraced them with the utmost
fondness; clasped them eagerly in their arms; could not be
prevailed upon to part with them, till they were forced away,
which was more grievous and afflicting than if their hearts had
been torn out of their breasts. The hostages being arrived in
Sicily, were carried from thence to Rome; and the consuls
told the deputies, that when they should arrive at Utica, they
would acquaint them with the orders of the republic.
</p>

<p>
In such a situation of affairs, nothing can be more grievous
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
than a state of uncertainty, which, without descending to particulars,
gives occasion to the mind to image to itself every
misery.<note place='foot'>Polyb. p. 975. Appian, p. 44-46.</note>
As soon as it was known that the fleet was arrived at
Utica, the deputies repaired to the Roman camp; signifying,
that they were come in the name of their republic, in order to
receive their commands, which they were ready to obey. The
consul, after praising their good disposition and compliance,
commanded them to deliver up to him, without fraud or delay,
all their arms. This they consented to, but besought him to
reflect on the sad condition to which he was reducing them,
at a time when Asdrubal, whose quarrel against them was
owing to no other cause than their perfect submission to the
orders of the Romans, was advanced almost to their gates,
with an army of twenty thousand men. The answer returned
them was, that the Romans would set that matter right.
</p>

<p>
This order was immediately put in execution.<note place='foot'>Appian, p. 46.</note>
There arrived in the camp a long train of waggons, loaded with all
the preparations of war, taken out of Carthage: two hundred
thousand complete sets of armour, a numberless multitude of
darts and javelins, with two thousand engines for shooting
darts and stones.<note place='foot'>Balistæ or
Catapultæ.&mdash;Trans.</note> Then followed the deputies of Carthage,
accompanied by the most venerable senators and priests, who
came purposely to try to move the Romans to compassion in
this critical moment, when their sentence was going to be
pronounced, and their fate would be irreversible. Censorinus,
the consul, for it was he who had all along spoken, rose up
for a moment at their coming, and expressed some kindness
and affection for them; but suddenly assuming a grave and
severe countenance: <q>I cannot,</q> says he, <q>but commend the
readiness with which you execute the orders of the senate.
They have commanded me to tell you, that it is their absolute
will and pleasure that you depart out of Carthage, which they
have resolved to destroy; and that you remove into any other
part of your dominions which you shall think proper, provided
it be at the distance of eighty stadia<note place='foot'>Four leagues,
or twelve miles.&mdash;Trans.</note> from the sea.</q>
</p>

<p>
The instant the consul had pronounced this fulminating
decree, nothing was heard among the Carthaginians but
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
lamentable shrieks and howlings.<note place='foot'>Appian, p.
46-53.</note> Being now in a manner
thunderstruck, they neither knew where they were, nor what
they did; but rolled themselves in the dust, tearing their
clothes, and unable to vent their grief any otherwise, than by
broken sighs and deep groans. Being afterwards a little recovered,
they lifted up their hands with the air of suppliants
one moment towards the gods, and the next towards the
Romans, imploring their mercy and justice towards a people,
who would soon be reduced to the extremes of despair. But
as both the gods and men were deaf to their fervent prayers,
they soon changed them into reproaches and imprecations;
bidding the Romans call to mind, that there were such beings
as avenging deities, whose severe eyes were for ever open on
guilt and treachery. The Romans themselves could not refrain
from tears at so moving a spectacle, but their resolution
was fixed. The deputies could not even prevail so far, as to
get the execution of this order suspended, till they should
have an opportunity of presenting themselves again before the
senate, to attempt, if possible, to get it revoked. They
were forced to set out immediately, and carry the answer to
Carthage.
</p>

<p>
The people waited for their return with such an impatience
and terror, as words could never express.<note place='foot'>Appian,
p. 53, 54.</note> It was scarce possible
for them to break through the crowd that flocked round
them, to hear the answer, which was but too strongly painted
in their faces. When they were come into the senate, and
had declared the barbarous orders of the Romans, a general
shriek informed the people of their fate; and from that instant,
nothing was seen and heard in every part of the city, but
howling and despair, madness and fury.
</p>

<p>
The reader will here give me leave to interrupt the course
of the history for a moment, to reflect on the conduct of the
Romans. It is great pity that the fragment of Polybius,
where an account is given of this deputation, should end
exactly in the most interesting part of this narrative. I
should set a much higher value on one short reflection of so
judicious an author, than on the long harangues which Appian
ascribes to the deputies and the consul. I can never believe,
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
that so rational, judicious, and just a man as Polybius, could
have approved the proceedings of the Romans on the present
occasion. We do not here discover, in my opinion, any of
the characteristics which distinguished them anciently; that
greatness of soul, that rectitude, that utter abhorrence of all
mean artifices, frauds, and impostures, which, as is somewhere
said, formed no part of the Roman disposition; <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Minimè
Romanis artibus</foreign>. Why did not the Romans attack the Carthaginians
by open force? Why should they declare expressly
in a treaty (a most solemn and sacred thing) that they allowed
them the full enjoyment of their liberties and laws; and understand,
at the same time, certain private conditions, which
proved the entire ruin of both? Why should they conceal,
under the scandalous omission of the word <emph>city</emph> in this treaty,
the perfidious design of destroying Carthage? as if, beneath
the cover of such an equivocation, they might destroy it with
justice. In short, why did the Romans not make their last
declaration, till after they had extorted from the Carthaginians,
at different times, their hostages and arms, that is, till they
had absolutely rendered them incapable of disobeying their
most arbitrary commands? Is it not manifest, that Carthage,
notwithstanding all its defeats and losses, though it was weakened
and almost exhausted, was still a terror to the Romans,
and that they were persuaded they were not able to conquer
it by force of arms? It is very dangerous to be possessed of
so much power, as to be able to commit injustice with impunity,
and with a prospect of being a gainer by it. The experience
of all ages shows, that states seldom scruple to commit
injustice, when they think it will conduce to their advantage.
</p>

<p>
The noble character which Polybius gives of the Achæans,
differs widely from what was practised here.<note place='foot'>Polyb.
l. xiii. p. 671, 672.</note> That people,
says he, far from using artifice and deceit towards their allies,
in order to enlarge their power, did not think themselves allowed
to employ them even against their enemies, considering
only those victories as solid and glorious, which were obtained
sword in hand, by dint of courage and bravery. He owns, in
the same place, that there then remained among the Romans
but very faint traces of the ancient generosity of their ancestors;
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
and he thinks it incumbent on him (as he declares) to
make this remark, in opposition to a maxim which was grown
very common in his time among persons in the administration
of the government, who imagined, that sincerity is inconsistent
with good policy; and that it is impossible to succeed in the
administration of state affairs, either in war or peace, without
using fraud and deceit on some occasions.
</p>

<p>
I now return to my subject.<note place='foot'>Appian,
p. 55. Strabo, l. xvii. p. 833.</note> The consuls made no great
haste to march against Carthage, not suspecting they had any
thing to fear from that city, as it was now disarmed. The
inhabitants took the opportunity of this delay to put themselves
in a posture of defence, being all unanimously resolved not to
quit the city. They appointed as general, without the walls,
Asdrubal, who was at the head of twenty thousand men; and
to whom deputies were sent accordingly, to entreat him to
forget, for his country's sake, the injustice which had been
done him, from the dread they were under of the Romans.
The command of the troops, within the walls, was given to
another Asdrubal, grandson of Masinissa. They then applied
themselves to the making arms with incredible expedition.
The temples, the palaces, the open markets and squares, were
all changed into so many arsenals, where men and women
worked day and night. Every day were made a hundred and
and forty shields, three hundred swords, five hundred pikes or
javelins, a thousand arrows, and a great number of engines to
discharge them; and because they wanted materials to make
ropes, the women cut off their hair, and abundantly supplied
their wants on this occasion.
</p>

<p>
Masinissa was very much disgusted at the Romans, because,
after he had extremely weakened the Carthaginians, they came
and reaped the fruits of his victory, without acquainting him
in any manner with their design, which circumstance caused
some coldness between them.<note place='foot'>Appian, p. 55.</note>
</p>

<p>
During this interval, the consuls were advancing towards
the city, in order to besiege it.<note place='foot'>Appian, p. 55-63.</note>
As they expected nothing less
than a vigorous resistance, the incredible resolution and courage
of the besieged filled them with the utmost astonishment.
</p>

<p>
The Carthaginians were for ever making the boldest sallies,
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
in order to repulse the besiegers, to burn their engines, and
harass their foragers. Censorinus attacked the city on one
side, and Manilius on the other. Scipio, afterwards surnamed
Africanus, served then as tribune in the army; and distinguished
himself above the rest of the officers, no less by his
prudence than by his bravery. The consul, under whom he
fought, committed many oversights, by having refused to follow
his advice. This young officer extricated the troops from
several dangers, into which the imprudence of their leaders
had plunged them. A renowned officer, Phamæas by name,
who was general of the enemy's cavalry, and continually
harassed the foragers, did not dare ever to keep the field,
when it was Scipio's turn to support them; so capable was he
of keeping his troops in good order, and posting himself to
advantage. So great and universal a reputation excited some
envy against him at first; but as he behaved, in all respects,
with the utmost modesty and reserve, that envy was soon
changed into admiration; so that when the senate sent deputies
to the camp, to inquire into the state of the siege, the
whole army gave him unanimously the highest commendations;
the soldiers, as well as officers, nay, the very generals, with
one voice extolled the merit of young Scipio: so necessary is
it for a man to deaden, if I may be allowed the expression,
the splendour of his rising glory, by a sweet and modest carriage;
and not to excite jealousy, by haughty and self-sufficient
behaviour, as this naturally awakens pride in others, and
makes even virtue itself odious!
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3857. A. Rom. 601.</note>
About the same time, Masinissa, finding his end approach,
sent to desire a visit from Scipio, in order that he
might invest him with full powers to dispose, as he
should see proper, of his kingdom and property, in
behalf of his children.<note place='foot'>Appian, p.
63.</note> But, on Scipio's arrival, he found that
monarch dead. Masinissa had commanded them, with his
dying breath, to follow implicitly the directions of Scipio,
whom he appointed to be a kind of father and guardian to
them. I shall give no farther account here of the family and
posterity of Masinissa, because that would interrupt too much
the history of Carthage.
</p>

<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>

<p>
The high esteem which Phamæas had entertained for
Scipio induced him to forsake the Carthaginians, and go over
to the Romans.<note place='foot'>Appian, p. 65.</note>
Accordingly, he joined them with above two
thousand horse, and was afterwards of great service at the
siege.
</p>

<p>
Calpurnius Piso, the consul, and L. Mancinus, his lieutenant,
arrived in Africa in the beginning of the spring.<note place='foot'>Page 66.</note>
Nothing remarkable was transacted during this campaign.
The Romans were even defeated on several occasions, and
carried on the siege of Carthage but slowly. The besieged,
on the contrary, had recovered their spirits. Their troops
were considerably increased; they daily got new allies; and
even sent an express as far as Macedonia, to the counterfeit
Philip,<note place='foot'>Andriscus.&mdash;Trans.</note>
who pretended to be the son of Perseus, and was then
engaged in a war with the Romans; to exhort him to carry
it on with vigour, and promising to furnish him with money
and ships.
</p>

<p>
This news occasioned some uneasiness at Rome.<note place='foot'>Page 68.</note>
The people began to doubt the success of a war, which grew daily
more uncertain, and was more important, than had at first
been imagined. As much as they were dissatisfied with the
dilatoriness of the generals, and exclaimed against their conduct,
so much did they unanimously agree in applauding
young Scipio, and extolling his rare and uncommon virtues.
He was come to Rome, in order to stand candidate for the
edileship. The instant he appeared in the assembly, his name,
his countenance, his reputation, a general persuasion that he
was designed by the gods to end the third Punic war, as the
first Scipio, his grandfather by adoption, had terminated the
second; these several circumstances made a very strong impression
on the people, and though it was contrary to law, and
therefore opposed by the ancient men, instead of the edileship
which<note place='margin'>A.M. 3858. A. Rom. 602.</note>
he sued for, the people, disregarding for once
the laws, conferred the consulship upon him, and
assigned him Africa for his province, without casting
lots for the provinces, as usual, and as Drusus his colleague
demanded.
</p>

<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>

<p>
As soon as Scipio had completed his recruits, he set out
for Sicily, and arrived soon after in Utica.<note place='foot'>Appian,
p. 69.</note> He came very
seasonably for Mancinus, Piso's lieutenant, who had rashly
fixed himself in a post where he was surrounded by the enemy;
and would have been cut to pieces that very morning, had not
the new consul, who, on his arrival, heard of the danger he was
in, reembarked his troops in the night, and sailed with the
utmost speed to his assistance.
</p>

<p>
Scipio's first care, after his arrival, was to revive discipline
among the troops, which he found had been entirely neglected.<note place='foot'>Page
70.</note> There was not the least regularity, subordination, or obedience.
Nothing was attended to but rapine, feasting, and diversions.
He drove from the camp all useless persons, settled the quality
of the provisions he would have brought in by the sutlers, and
allowed of none but what were plain and fit for soldiers, studiously
banishing all dainties and luxuries.
</p>

<p>
After he had made these regulations, which cost him but
little time and pains, because he himself first set the example,
he was persuaded that those under him were soldiers, and
thereupon he prepared to carry on the siege with vigour.
Having ordered his troops to provide themselves with axes,
levers, and scaling-ladders, he led them in the dead of the
night, and without the least noise, to a district of the city,
called Megara; when ordering them to give a sudden and
general shout, he attacked it with great vigour. The enemy,
who did not expect to be attacked in the night, were at first
in the utmost terror; however, they defended themselves so
courageously, that Scipio could not scale the walls. But perceiving
a tower that was forsaken, and which stood without the
city, very near the walls, he detached thither a party of intrepid
and resolute soldiers, who, by the help of pontons,<note place='foot'>A
sort of movable bridge.&mdash;Trans.</note> got
from the tower on the walls, and from thence into Megara, the
gates of which they broke down. Scipio entered it immediately
after, and drove the enemies out of that post; who,
terrified at this unexpected assault, and imagining that the
whole city was taken, fled into the citadel, whither they were
followed even by those forces that were encamped without the
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
city, who abandoned their camp to the Romans, and thought it
necessary for them to fly to a place of security.
</p>

<p>
Before I proceed further, it will be proper to give some
account of the situation and dimensions of Carthage, which, in
the beginning of the war against the Romans, contained seven
hundred thousand inhabitants.<note place='foot'>Appian,
p. 56, 57. Strabo, l. xvii. p. 832.</note> It stood at the bottom of a
gulf, surrounded by the sea, and in the form of a peninsula,
whose neck, that is, the isthmus which joined it to the continent,
was twenty-five stadia, or a league and a quarter in
breadth. The peninsula was three hundred and sixty stadia,
or eighteen leagues round. On the west side there projected
from it a long neck of land, half a stadium, or twelve fathoms
broad; which, advancing into the sea, divided it from a morass,
and was fenced on all sides with rocks and a single wall. On
the south side, towards the continent, where stood the citadel
called Byrsa, the city was surrounded with a triple wall, thirty
cubits high, exclusive of the parapets and towers, with which
it was flanked all round at equal distances, each interval being
fourscore fathoms. Every tower was four stories high, and
the stalls but two; they were arched, and in the lower part
were walls to hold three hundred elephants with their fodder,
and over these were stables for four thousand horses, and lofts
for their food. There likewise was room enough to lodge
twenty thousand foot, and four thousand horse. All these
were contained within the walls alone. In one place only the
walls were weak and low; and that was a neglected angle,
which began at the neck of land above-mentioned, and extended
as far as the harbours, which were on the west side. Of
these there were two, which communicated with each other,
but had only one entrance, seventy feet broad, shut up with
chains. The first was appropriated for the merchants, and had
several distinct habitations for the seamen. The second, or
inner harbour, was for the ships of war, in the midst of which
stood an island called Cothon, lined, as the harbour was, with
large quays, in which were distinct receptacles<note place='foot'>Νεωσοίκους,
Strabo.&mdash;Trans.</note> for sheltering
from the weather two hundred and twenty ships; over these
were magazines or storehouses, wherein was lodged whatever
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
is necessary for arming and equipping fleets. The entrance
into each of these receptacles was adorned with two marble
pillars of the Ionic order. So that both the harbour and the
island represented on each side two magnificent galleries. In
this island was the admiral's palace; and, as it stood opposite
to the mouth of the harbour, he could from thence discover
whatever was doing at sea, though no one, from thence, could
see what was transacting in the inward part of the harbour.
The merchants, in like manner, had no prospect of the men of
war; the two ports being separated by a double wall, each
having its particular gate, that led to the city, without passing
through the other harbour. So that Carthage may be
divided into three parts:<note place='foot'>Boch. in
Phal. p. 512.</note> the harbour, which was double, and
called sometimes Cothon, from the little island of that name:
the citadel, named Byrsa: the city properly so called, where
the inhabitants dwelt, which lay round the citadel, and was
called Megara.
</p>

<p>
At daybreak,<note place='foot'>Appian, p. 72.</note> Asdrubal<note place='foot'>It
was he who had first commanded without the city, but having caused the
other Asdrubal, Masinissa's grandson, to be put to death, he got the command of the
troops within the walls.&mdash;Trans.</note> perceiving the ignominious defeat
of his troops, in order that he might be revenged on the
Romans, and, at the same time, deprive the inhabitants of all
hopes of accommodation and pardon, brought all the Roman
prisoners he had taken, upon the walls, in sight of the whole
army. There he put them to the most exquisite torture;
putting out their eyes, cutting off their noses, ears, and fingers;
tearing their skin from their body with iron rakes or harrows,
and then threw them headlong from the top of the battlements.
So inhuman a treatment filled the Carthaginians with
horror: however, he did not spare even them; but murdered
many senators who had ventured to oppose his tyranny.
</p>

<p>
Scipio,<note place='foot'>Page 73.</note> finding
himself absolute master of the isthmus,
burnt the camp, which the enemy had deserted, and built a
new one for his troops. It was of a square form, surrounded
with large and deep intrenchments, and fenced with strong
palisades. On the side which faced the Carthaginians, he
built a wall twelve feet high, flanked at proper distances with
towers and redoubts; and on the middle tower, he erected a
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
very high wooden fort, from whence could be seen whatever
was doing in the city. This wall was equal to the whole
breadth of the isthmus, that is, twenty-five stadia.<note place='foot'>Four
miles and three quarters.&mdash;Trans.</note> The
enemy, who were within bow-shot of it, employed their utmost
efforts to put a stop to this work; but, as the whole army
were employed upon it day and night, without intermission, it
was finished in twenty-four days. Scipio reaped a double
advantage from this work: first, his forces were lodged more
safely and commodiously than before: secondly, he cut off all
provisions from the besieged, to whom none could now be
brought but by sea; which was attended with many difficulties,
both because the sea is frequently very tempestuous in that
place, and because the Roman fleet kept a strict guard. This
proved one of the chief causes of the famine which raged soon
after in the city. Besides, Asdrubal distributed the corn that
was brought, only among the thirty thousand men who served
under him, caring very little what became of the rest of the
inhabitants.
</p>

<p>
To distress them still more by the want of provisions,
Scipio attempted to stop up the mouth of the haven by a
mole, beginning at the above-mentioned neck of land, which
was near the harbour.<note place='foot'>Appian, p.
74.</note> The besieged, at first, looked upon
this attempt as ridiculous, and accordingly they insulted the
workmen: but, at last, seeing them make an astonishing progress
every day, they began to be afraid; and to take such
measures as might, if possible, render the attempt unsuccessful.
Every one, to the women and children, fell to work,
but so privately, that all that Scipio could learn from the prisoners,
was, that they had heard a great noise in the harbour,
but did not know the occasion of it. At last, all things being
ready, the Carthaginians opened, on a sudden, a new outlet
on the other side of the haven; and appeared at sea with a
numerous fleet, which they had just then built with the old
materials found in their magazines. It is generally allowed,
that had they attacked the Roman fleet directly, they must
infallibly have taken it; because, as no such attempt was
expected, and every man was elsewhere employed, the Carthaginians
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
would have found it without rowers, soldiers, or officers.
But the ruin of Carthage, says the historian, was decreed.
Having therefore only offered a kind of insult or bravado to
the Romans, they returned into the harbour.
</p>

<p>
Two days after, they brought forward their ships, with a
resolution to fight in good earnest, and found the enemy ready
for them.<note place='foot'>Appian, p. 75.</note>
This battle was to determine the fate of both parties.
The conflict was long and obstinate, each exerting themselves
to the utmost; the one to save their country, now reduced to
the last extremity, and the other to complete their victory.
During the fight, the Carthaginian brigantines running along
under the large Roman ships, broke to pieces sometimes their
sterns, and at other times their rudders and oars; and, when
briskly attacked, retreated with surprising swiftness, and
returned immediately to the charge. At last, after the two
armies had fought with equal success till sunset, the Carthaginians
thought proper to retire; not that they believed themselves
overcome, but in order to begin the fight again on the
morrow. Part of their ships, not being able to run swiftly
enough into the harbour, because the mouth of it was too
narrow, took shelter under a very spacious terrace, which had
been thrown up against the walls to unload goods, on the side
of which a small rampart had been raised during this war, to
prevent the enemy from possessing themselves of it. Here
the fight was again renewed with more vigour than ever, and
lasted till late at night. The Carthaginians suffered very much,
and the few ships which got off, sailed for refuge to the city.
Morning being come, Scipio attacked the terrace, and carried
it, though with great difficulty; after which he made a lodgement
there, and fortified himself on it, and built a brick-wall
close to those of the city, and of the same height. When it
was finished, he commanded four thousand men to get on the
top of it, and to discharge from it a perpetual shower of darts
and arrows upon the enemy, which did great execution; because,
as the two walls were of equal height, almost every dart
took effect. Thus ended this campaign.
</p>

<p>
During the winter quarters, Scipio endeavoured to overpower
the enemy's troops without the city,<note place='foot'>Ibid.
p. 78.</note> who very much
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
harassed the convoys that brought his provisions, and protected
such as were sent to the besieged. For this purpose he
attacked a neighbouring fort, called Nepheris, where they
used to shelter themselves. In the last action, above seventy
thousand of the enemy, as well soldiers as peasants, who had
been enlisted, were cut to pieces; and the fort was carried with
great difficulty, after sustaining a siege of two and twenty days.
The seizure of this fort was followed by the surrender of almost
all the strong-holds in Africa; and contributed very much to
the taking of Carthage itself, into which, from that time, it was
almost impossible to bring any provisions.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3859. A. Rom. 603.</note>
Early in the spring, Scipio attacked, at one and the same
time, the harbour called Cothon, and the citadel.<note place='foot'>Appian, p. 79.</note>
Having possessed himself of the wall which surrounded
this port, he threw himself into the great
square of the city that was near it, from whence was an ascent
to the citadel, up three streets, on each side of which were
houses, from the tops whereof a shower of darts was discharged
upon the Romans, who were obliged, before they could advance
farther, to force the houses they came first to, and post themselves
in them, in order to dislodge from thence the enemy
who fought from the neighbouring houses. The combat, which
was carried on from the tops, and in every part of the houses,
continued six days, during which a dreadful slaughter was
made. To clear the streets, and make way for the troops, the
Romans dragged aside, with hooks, the bodies of such of the
inhabitants as had been slain, or precipitated headlong from
the houses, and threw them into pits, the greatest part of them
being still alive and panting. In this toil, which lasted six
days and as many nights, the soldiers were relieved from
time to time by fresh ones, without which they would have
been quite spent. Scipio was the only person who did not
take a wink of sleep all this time; giving orders in all
places, and scarce allowing himself leisure to take the least
refreshment.
</p>

<p>
There was every reason to believe, that the siege would
last much longer, and occasion a great effusion of
blood.<note place='foot'>Ibid. p. 81.</note> But
on the seventh day, there appeared a company of men in the
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
posture and habit of suppliants, who desired no other conditions,
than that the Romans would please to spare the lives of
all those who should be willing to leave the citadel: which
request was granted them, only the deserters were excepted.
Accordingly, there came out fifty thousand men and women,
who were sent into the fields under a strong guard. The
deserters, who were about nine hundred, finding they would
not be allowed quarter, fortified themselves in the temple of
Æsculapius, with Asdrubal, his wife, and two children; where,
though their number was but small, they might have held out
a long time, because the temple stood on a very high hill,
upon rocks, the ascent to which was by sixty steps. But at
last, exhausted by hunger and watching, oppressed with fear,
and seeing their destruction at hand, they lost all patience;
and abandoning the lower part of the temple, they retired to
the uppermost story, resolved not to quit it but with their lives.
</p>

<p>
In the mean time, Asdrubal, being desirous of saving his
own life, came down privately to Scipio, carrying an olive
branch in his hand, and threw himself at his feet. Scipio
showed him immediately to the deserters, who, transported
with rage and fury at the sight, vented millions of imprecations
against him, and set fire to the temple. Whilst it was kindling,
we are told, that Asdrubal's wife, dressing herself as splendidly
as possible, and placing herself with her two children in sight
of Scipio, addressed him with a loud voice: <q>I call not down,</q>
says she, <q>curses upon thy head, O Roman; for thou only
takest the privilege allowed by the laws of war: but may the
gods of Carthage, and thou in concert with them, punish,
according to his deserts, the false wretch, who has betrayed his
country, his gods, his wife, his children!</q> Then directing
herself to Asdrubal, <q>Perfidious wretch,</q> says she, <q>thou basest
of men! this fire will presently consume both me and my
children; but as to thee, unworthy general of Carthage, go&mdash;adorn
the gay triumph of thy conqueror&mdash;suffer, in the sight
of all Rome, the tortures thou so justly deservest!</q> She had
no sooner pronounced these words, than, seizing her children,
she cut their throats, threw them into the flames, and afterwards
rushed into them herself; in which she was imitated by
all the deserters.
</p>

<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>

<p>
With regard to Scipio,<note place='foot'>Appian, p.
82.</note> when he saw this famous city, which
had been so flourishing for seven hundred years, and might
have been compared to the greatest empires, on account of the
extent of its dominions both by sea and land; its mighty
armies; its fleets, elephants, and riches; while the Carthaginians
were even superior to other nations, by their courage
and greatness of soul; as, notwithstanding their being deprived
of arms and ships, they had sustained, for three whole years,
all the hardships and calamities of a long siege; seeing, I say,
this city entirely ruined, historians relate, that he could not
refuse his tears to the unhappy fate of Carthage. He reflected,
that cities, nations, and empires, are liable to revolutions no
less than private men; that the like sad fate had befallen Troy
anciently so powerful; and, in later times, the Assyrians,
Medes, and Persians, whose dominions were once of so great
an extent; and very recently, the Macedonians, whose empire
had been so glorious throughout the world. Full of these
mournful ideas, he repeated the following verses of Homer:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Ἔσσεται ἦμαρ, ὄταν ποτ᾽ ὀλώλη Ἴλιος ἱρὴ,</l>
<l>Καὶ Πρίαμος, καὶ λαὸς εὐμμελίω Πριάμοιο.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Il.</hi> δ. 164, 165.
</p>

<lg>
<l>The day shall come, that great avenging day.</l>
<l>Which Troy's proud glories in the dust shall lay,</l>
<l>When Priam's pow'rs and Priam's self shall fall,</l>
<l>And one prodigious ruin swallow all.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Pope.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
thereby denouncing the future destiny of Rome, as he himself
confessed to Polybius, who desired Scipio to explain himself
on that occasion.
</p>

<p>
Had the truth enlightened his soul, he would have discovered
what we are taught in the Scriptures, that <q>because of unrighteous
dealings, injuries, and riches got by deceit, a kingdom
is translated from one people to another.</q><note place='foot'>Ecclus,
x. 8.</note> Carthage is destroyed,
because its avarice, perfidiousness, and cruelty, have
attained their utmost height. The like fate will attend Rome,
when its luxury, ambition, pride, and unjust usurpations,
concealed beneath a specious and delusive show of justice
and virtue, shall have compelled the sovereign Lord, the
disposer of empires, to give the universe an important lesson
in its fall.
</p>

<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3859. A. Carth. 701. A. Rom. 603. Ant. J.C. 145.</note>
Carthage being taken in this manner, Scipio gave the
plunder of it (the gold, silver, statues, and other
offerings which should be found in the temples,
excepted) to his soldiers for some days.<note place='foot'>Appian,
p. 83.</note> He afterwards
bestowed several military rewards on them, as
well as on the officers, two of whom had particularly
distinguished themselves, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> Tib. Gracchus, and Caius Fannius,
who first scaled the walls. After this, adorning a small ship
(an excellent sailer) with the enemy's spoils, he sent it to
Rome with the news of the victory.
</p>

<p>
At the same time he invited the inhabitants of Sicily to
come and take possession of the pictures and statues which the
Carthaginians had plundered them of in the former wars.<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>
When he restored to the citizens of Agrigentum, Phalaris's
famous bull,<note place='foot'>Quem taurum Scipio
cùm redderet Agrigentinis, dixisse dicitur, æquum esse illos cogitare
utrum esset Siculis utilius, suisne servire, au populo R. obtemperare,
cùm idem monumentum et domesticæ crudelitatis, et nostræ mansuetudinis haberent.
Cicer. <hi rend='italic'>Verr.</hi> vi. n. 73.&mdash;Trans.</note>
he told them that this bull, which was, at one
and the same time, a monument of the cruelty of their ancient
kings, and of the lenity of their present sovereigns, ought to
make them sensible which would be most advantageous for
them, to live under the yoke of Sicilians, or the government of
the Romans.
</p>

<p>
Having exposed to sale part of the spoils of Carthage, he
commanded, on the most severe penalties, his family not to
take or even buy any of them; so careful was he to remove
from himself, and all belonging to him, the least suspicion
of avarice.
</p>

<p>
When the news of the taking of Carthage was brought to
Rome, the people abandoned themselves to the most immoderate
transports of joy, as if the public tranquillity had not been
secured till that instant.<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>
They revolved in their minds, all the
calamities which the Carthaginians had brought upon them,
in Sicily, in Spain, and even in Italy, for sixteen years together;
during which, Hannibal had plundered four hundred towns,
destroyed, in different engagements, three hundred thousand
men, and reduced Rome itself to the utmost extremity.
Amidst the remembrance of these past evils, the people in
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
Rome would ask one another, whether it were really true that
Carthage was in ashes. All ranks and degrees of men emulously
strove who should show the greatest gratitude towards
the gods; and the citizens were, for many days, employed
wholly in solemn sacrifices, in public prayers, games, and
spectacles.
</p>

<p>
After these religious duties were ended, the senate sent ten
commissioners into Africa, to regulate, in conjunction with
Scipio, the fate and condition of that country for the time to
come.<note place='foot'>Appian, p. 84.</note>
Their first care was, to demolish whatever was still
remaining of Carthage.<note place='foot'>We may guess
at the dimensions of this famous city, by what Florus says, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>
that it was seventeen days on fire, before it could be all consumed. Quanta urbs
deleta sit, ut de cæteris taceam, vel ignium morâ probari potest: quippe per continuos
decem et septem dies vix potuit incendium extingui. Lib. ii. c.
15.&mdash;Trans.</note> Rome,<note place='foot'>Neque se Roma,
jam terrarum orbe superato, securam speravit fore, si nomen
usquam maneret Carthaginis. Adeo odium certaminibus ortum, ultra metum durat,
et ne in victis quidem deponitur, neque antè invisum esse desinit, quàm esse desiit.
Vel. Paterc. l. i. c. 12.&mdash;Trans.</note> though mistress of almost
the whole world, could not believe herself safe as long as even
the name of Carthage was in being. So true it is, that an
inveterate hatred, fomented by long and bloody wars, lasts even
beyond the time when all cause of fear is removed; and does
not cease, till the object that occasions it is no more. Orders
were given, in the name of the Romans, that it should never
be inhabited again; and dreadful imprecations were denounced
against those, who, contrary to this prohibition, should attempt
to rebuild any parts of it, especially those called Byrsa and
Megara. In the mean time, every one who desired it, was
admitted to see Carthage: Scipio being well pleased, to have
people view the sad ruins of a city which had dared to contend
with Rome for empire.<note place='foot'>Ut ipse locus eorum,
qui cum hâc urbe de imperio certârunt, vestigia calamitatis
ostenderet. Cic. <hi rend='italic'>Agrar.</hi> ii. n.
50.&mdash;Trans.</note> The commissioners decreed farther,
that those cities which, during this war, had joined with the
enemy, should all be rased, and their territories be given to
the Roman allies; they particularly made a grant to the citizens
of Utica, of the whole country lying between Carthage and
Hippo. All the rest they made tributary, and reduced it into
a Roman province, whither a prætor was sent annually.
</p>

<p>
All matters being thus settled, Scipio returned to Rome,
where he made his entry in triumph.<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note> So magnificent a one
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
had never been seen before; the whole exhibiting nothing but
statues, rare, invaluable pictures, and other curiosities, which
the Carthaginians had, for many years, been collecting in other
countries; not to mention the money carried into the public
treasury, which amounted to immense sums.
</p>

<p>
Notwithstanding the great precautions which were taken to
hinder Carthage from being ever rebuilt, in less than thirty
years after, and even in Scipio's lifetime, one of the Gracchi,
to ingratiate himself with the people, undertook to found it
anew, and conducted thither a colony consisting of six thousand
citizens for that purpose.<note place='foot'>Appian, p. 85.
Plut. <hi rend='italic'>in vit. Gracch</hi> p. 839.</note>
The senate, hearing that the workmen
had been terrified by many unlucky omens, at the time
they were tracing the limits, and laying the foundations of the
new city, would have suspended the attempt; but the tribune, not
being over scrupulous in religious matters, carried on the work,
notwithstanding all these bad presages, and finished it in a few
days. This was the first Roman colony that was ever sent out
of Italy.
</p>

<p>
It is probable, that only a kind of huts were built there, since
we are told,<note place='foot'>Marius cursum in
Africam direxit, inopemque vitam in tugurio ruinarum Carthaginensium
toleravit: cùm Marius aspiciens Carthaginem, illa intuens Marium,
alter alteri possent esse solatio. Vel. Paterc. l. ii c.
19.&mdash;Trans.</note> that when Marius retired hither, in his flight to
Africa, he lived in a mean and poor condition amid the ruins
of Carthage, consoling himself by the sight of so astonishing a
spectacle; himself serving, in some measure, as a consolation
to that ill-fated city.
</p>

<p>
Appian relates,<note place='foot'>Appian, p. 85.</note>
that Julius Cæsar, after the death of Pompey,
having crossed into Africa, saw, in a dream, an army composed
of a prodigious number of soldiers, who, with tears in
their eyes, called him; and that, struck with the vision, he writ
down in his pocket-book the design which he formed on this
occasion, of rebuilding Carthage and Corinth: but that having
been murdered soon after by the conspirators, Augustus Cæsar,
his adopted son, who found this memorandum among his papers,
rebuilt Carthage near the spot where it stood formerly, in order
that the imprecations which had been vented, at the time of its
destruction, against those who should presume to rebuild it,
might not fall upon him.
</p>

<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>

<p>
I know not what foundation Appian has for this story; but
we read in Strabo,<note place='foot'>Strabo, l. xvii. p.
833.</note> that Carthage and Corinth were rebuilt at
the same time by Cæsar, to whom he gives the name of god, by
which title, a little before, he had plainly intended Julius
Cæsar;<note place='foot'>Ibid. 831.</note> and
Plutarch,<note place='foot'>Page 733.</note> in the life of that emperor, ascribes
expressly to him the establishment of these two colonies; and
observes, that one remarkable circumstance in these two cities
is, that as both had been taken and destroyed at the same
time, they likewise were at the same time rebuilt and repeopled.
However this be, Strabo affirms, that in his time Carthage
was as populous as any city in Africa; and it rose to be
the capital of Africa, under the succeeding emperors. It
existed for about seven hundred years after, in splendour, but
at last was so completely destroyed by the Saracens, in the
beginning of the seventh century, that neither its name, nor
the least footsteps of it, are known at this time in the country.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A Digression on the Manners and Character of the second
Scipio Africanus.</hi>&mdash;Scipio, the destroyer of Carthage, was son
to the famous Paulus Æmilius, who conquered Perseus, the
last king of Macedon; and consequently grandson to that
Paulus Æmilius who lost his life in the battle of Cannæ. He
was adopted by the son of the great Scipio Africanus, and
called Scipio Æmilianus; the names of the two families being so
united, pursuant to the law of adoptions. He supported,
with equal lustre, the dignity of both houses, by all the qualities
that can confer honour on the sword and gown.<note place='foot'>Scipio
Æmilianus, vir avitis P. Africani paternisque L. Pauli virtutibus simillimus,
omnibus belli ac togæ dotibus, ingeniique ac studiorum eminentissimus seculi
sui, qui nihil in vitâ nisi laudandum aut fecit aut dixit aut seusit. Vel. Paterc.
l. i. c. 12.&mdash;Trans.</note> The
whole tenour of his life, says an historian, whether with regard
to his actions, his thoughts, or words, was deserving of the
highest praise. He distinguished himself particularly (an eulogium
that, at present, can seldom be applied to persons of the
military profession) by his exquisite taste for polite literature,
and all the sciences, as well as by the uncommon regard he
showed to learned men. It is universally known, that he was
reported to be the author of Terence's comedies, the most
polite and elegant writings which the Romans could boast. We
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
are told of Scipio,<note place='foot'>Neque enim quisquam
hoc Scipione elegantiùs intervalla negotiorum otio dispunxit:
semperque aut belli aut pacis serviit artibus, semper inter arma ac studia
versatus, aut corpus periculis, aut animum disciplinis exercuit. Vel.
Paterc. l. i. c. 13.&mdash;Trans.</note> that no man could blend more happily repose
and action, nor employ his leisure hours with greater delicacy
and taste: thus was he divided between arms and books, between
the military labours of the camp, and the peaceful employment
of the cabinet; in which he either exercised his body in
toils of war, or his mind in the study of the sciences. By this
he showed, that nothing does greater honour to a person of
distinction, of what quality or profession soever he be, than the
adorning his mind with knowledge. Cicero, speaking of Scipio,
says,<note place='foot'>Africanus semper Socraticum
Xenophontem in manibus habebat. <hi rend='italic'>Tusc. Quæst.</hi>
l. ii. n. 62.&mdash;Trans.</note> that he always had Xenophon's works in his hands,
which are so famous for the solid and excellent instructions
they contain, both in regard to war and policy.
</p>

<p>
He owed this exquisite taste for polite learning and the
sciences, to the excellent education which Paulus Æmilius
bestowed on his children.<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>in vit.
Æmil. Paul.</hi> p. 258.</note> He had put them under the ablest
masters in every art; and did not spare any expense on that
occasion, though his circumstances were very narrow: P.
Æmilius himself was present at all their lessons, as often as
the affairs of the state would permit; becoming, by this means,
their chief preceptor.
</p>

<p>
The intimate union between Polybius and Scipio put the
finishing stroke to the exalted qualities which, by the superiority
of his genius and disposition, and the excellency of his education,
were already the subject of admiration.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Excerpt.
è</hi> Polyb. p. 147-163.</note> Polybius, with
a great number of Achæans, whose fidelity the Romans suspected
during the war with Perseus, was detained in Rome, where his
merit soon caused his company to be coveted by all persons of
the highest quality in that city. Scipio, when scarce eighteen,
devoted himself entirely to Polybius: and considered as the
greatest felicity of his life, the opportunity he had of being
instructed by so great a master, whose society he preferred to
all the vain and idle amusements which are generally so alluring
to young persons.
</p>

<p>
Polybius's first care was to inspire Scipio with an aversion
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
for those equally dangerous and ignominious pleasures, to
which the Roman youth were so strongly addicted; the greatest
part of them being already depraved and corrupted by the luxury
and licentiousness which riches and new conquests had
introduced in Rome. Scipio, during the first five years that he
continued in so excellent a school, made the greatest improvement
in it; and, despising the ridicule, as well as the pernicious
examples, of persons of the same age with himself, he was looked
upon, even at that time, as a model of discretion and wisdom.
</p>

<p>
From hence, the transition was easy and natural to generosity,
to a noble disregard of riches, and to a laudable use of
them; all virtues so requisite in persons of illustrious birth, and
which Scipio carried to the most exalted pitch, as appears from
some instances of this kind related by Polybius, which are
highly worthy our admiration.
</p>

<p>
Æmilia,<note place='foot'>She was sister of Paulus Æmilius, father of the second
Scipio Africanus.&mdash;Trans.</note> wife of the first Scipio Africanus, and mother of
him who had adopted the Scipio mentioned here by Polybius,
had bequeathed, at her death, a great estate to the latter. This
lady, besides the diamonds and jewels which are worn by women
of her high rank, possessed a great number of gold and silver
vessels used in sacrifices, together with several splendid equipages,
and a considerable number of slaves of both sexes; the
whole suited to the opulence of the august house into which
she had married. At her death, Scipio made over all those rich
possessions to Papiria his mother, who, having been divorced a
considerable time before by Paulus Æmilius, and not being in
circumstances to support the dignity of her birth, lived in
great obscurity, and never appeared in the assemblies or public
ceremonies. But when she again frequented them with a
magnificent train, this noble generosity of Scipio did him great
honour, especially in the minds of the ladies, who expatiated on
it in all their conversations, and in a city whose inhabitants,
says Polybius, were not easily prevailed upon to part with
their money.
</p>

<p>
Scipio was no less admired on another occasion. He was
bound, in consequence of the estate that had fallen to him by
the death of his grandmother, to pay, at three different times,
to the two daughters of Scipio, his grandfather by adoption,
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
half their portions, which amounted to 50,000 French crowns.<note place='foot'>Or,
11,250<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> sterling.&mdash;Trans.</note>
The time for the payment of the first sum being expired, Scipio
put the whole money into the hands of a banker. Tiberius
Gracchus, and Scipio Nasica, who had married the two sisters,
imagining that Scipio had made a mistake, went to him, and
observed, that the laws allowed him three years to pay this sum
in, and at three different times. Young Scipio answered, that
he knew very well what the laws directed on this occasion;
that they might indeed be executed in their greatest rigour
towards strangers, but that friends and relations ought to treat
one another with a more generous simplicity; and therefore
desired them to receive the whole sum. They were struck with
such admiration at the generosity of their kinsman, that in their
return home, they reproached<note place='foot'>Κατεγνωκότες
τῆς αὐτῶν μικρολογίας.&mdash;Trans.</note> themselves for their narrow
way of thinking, at a time when they made the greatest figure,
and had the highest regard paid to them, of any family in
Rome. This generous action, says Polybius, was the more
admired, because no person in Rome, so far from consenting
to pay 50,000 crowns before they were due, would pay even a
thousand before the time for payment was elapsed.
</p>

<p>
It was from the same noble spirit that, two years after, Paulus
Æmilius his father being dead, he made over to his brother
Fabius, who was not so wealthy as himself, the part of their
father's estate, which was his (Scipio's) due, (amounting to
above threescore thousand crowns,<note place='foot'>Or, 13,500<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>
sterling.&mdash;Trans.</note>) in order that there might
not be so great a disparity between his fortune and that of his
brother.
</p>

<p>
This Fabius being desirous to exhibit a show of gladiators
after his father's decease, in honour of his memory, (as was
the custom in that age,) and not being able to defray the expenses
on this occasion, which amounted to a very heavy sum,
Scipio made him a present of fifteen thousand<note place='foot'>Or,
5375<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> sterling.&mdash;Trans.</note> crowns, in
order to defray at least half the charges of it.
</p>

<p>
The splendid presents which Scipio had made his mother
Papiria, reverted to him, by law as well as equity, after her
demise; and his sisters, according to the custom of those times
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
had not the least claim to them. Nevertheless, Scipio thought
it would have been dishonourable in him, had he taken them
back again. He therefore made over to his sisters whatever
he had presented to their mother, which amounted to a very
considerable sum; and by this fresh proof of his glorious
disregard of wealth, and the tender friendship he had for his
family, acquired the applause of the whole city.
</p>

<p>
These different benefactions, which amounted all together to
a prodigious sum, seem to have received a brighter lustre from
the age in which he bestowed them, he being still very young;
and yet more from the circumstances of the time when they
were presented, as well as the kind and obliging carriage he
assumed on those occasions.
</p>

<p>
The incidents I have here related are so repugnant to the
maxims of this age, that there might be reason to fear the
reader would consider them merely as the rhetorical flourishes
of an historian who was prejudiced in favour of his hero; if it
was not well known, that the predominant characteristic of
Polybius, by whom they are related, is a sincere love for truth,
and an utter aversion to adulation of every kind. In the very
passage whence this relation is extracted, he has thought it
necessary for him to be a little guarded, where he expatiates
on the virtuous actions and rare qualities of Scipio; and he
observes, that as his writings were to be perused by the Romans,
who were perfectly well acquainted with all the particulars
of this great man's life, he could not fail of being convicted
by them, should he venture to advance any falsehood; an
affront, to which it is not probable that an author, who has
ever so little regard for his reputation, would expose himself,
especially if no advantage was to accrue to him from it.
</p>

<p>
We have already observed, that Scipio had never given into
the fashionable debaucheries and excesses to which the young
people at Rome so generally abandoned themselves. But he
was sufficiently compensated for this self-denial of all destructive
pleasures, by the vigorous health he enjoyed all the
rest of his life, which enabled him to taste pleasure of a much
purer and more exalted kind, and to perform the great actions
that reflected so much glory upon him.
</p>

<p>
Hunting, which was his darling exercise, contributed also
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
very much to invigorate his constitution, and enabled him
also to endure the hardest toils. Macedonia, whither he followed
his father, gave him an opportunity of indulging to the
utmost of his desire his passion in this respect; for the chase,
which was the usual diversion of the Macedonian monarchs,
having been laid aside for some years on account of the wars,
Scipio found there an incredible quantity of game of every
kind. Paulus Æmilius, studious of procuring his son virtuous
pleasures of every kind, in order to divert his mind from those
which reason prohibits, gave him full liberty to indulge himself
in his favourite sport, during all the time that the Roman
forces continued in that country, after the victory he had gained
over Perseus. The illustrious youth employed his leisure hours
in an exercise which suited so well his age and inclination; and
was as successful in this innocent war against the beasts of
Macedonia, as his father had been in that which he had carried
on against the inhabitants of the country.
</p>

<p>
It was at Scipio's return from Macedon, that he met with
Polybius in Rome; and contracted the strict friendship with
him, which was afterwards so beneficial to our young Roman,
and did him almost as much honour in after-ages as all his
conquests. We find, from history, that Polybius lived with
the two brothers. One day, when himself and Scipio were
alone, the latter unbosomed himself freely to him, and complained,
but in the mildest and most gentle terms, that he, in
their conversations at table, always directed himself to his
brother Fabius, and never to him. <q>I am sensible,</q> says he,
<q>that this indifference arises from your supposing, with all
our citizens, that I am a heedless young man, and wholly
averse to the taste which now prevails in Rome, because I do
not devote myself to the studies of the bar, nor cultivate the
graces of elocution. But how should I do this? I am told
perpetually, that the Romans expect a general, and not an
orator, from the house of the Scipios. I will confess to you,
(pardon the sincerity with which I reveal my thoughts,) that
your coldness and indifference grieve me exceedingly.</q> Polybius,
surprised at this unexpected address, made Scipio the
kindest answer; and assured the illustrious youth, that though
he generally directed himself to his brother, yet this was not
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
out of disrespect to him, but only because Fabius was the
elder; not to mention (continued Polybius) that, knowing
you possessed but one soul, I conceived that I addressed both
when I spoke to either of you. He then assured Scipio, that
he was entirely at his command: that with regard to the
sciences, for which he discovered the happiest genius, he
would have opportunities sufficient to improve himself in
them, from the great number of learned Grecians who resorted
daily to Rome; but that, as to the art of war, which was
properly his profession, and his favourite study, he (Polybius)
might be of some little service to him. He had no sooner
spoke these words, than Scipio, grasping his hand in a kind
of rapture: <q>Oh! when,</q> says he, <q>shall I see the happy
day, when, disengaged from all other avocations, and living
with me, you will be so much my friend, as to direct your
endeavours to improve my understanding and regulate my
affections? It is then I shall think myself worthy of my
illustrious ancestors.</q> From that time Polybius, overjoyed to
see so young a man breathe such noble sentiments, devoted
himself particularly to our Scipio, who ever after paid him as
much reverence as if he had been his father.
</p>

<p>
However, Scipio did not esteem Polybius only as an excellent
historian, but valued him much more, and reaped much
greater advantages from him, as an able warrior and a profound
politician. Accordingly, he consulted him on every occasion,
and always took his advice even when he was at the head of
his army; concerting in private with Polybius all the operations
of the campaign, all the movements of the forces, all
enterprises against the enemy, and the several measures proper
for rendering them successful.
</p>

<p>
In a word, it was the common report,<note place='foot'>Pausan.
<hi rend='italic'>in Arcad.</hi> l. xiii. p. 505.</note> that our illustrious
Roman did not perform any great or good action without
being under some obligation to Polybius; nor even commit an
error, except when he acted without consulting him.
</p>

<p>
I request the reader to excuse this long digression, which
may be thought foreign to my subject, as I am not writing the
Roman history. However, it appeared to me so well adapted
to the general design I propose to myself, in this work, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
the cultivating and improving the minds of youth, that I could
not forbear introducing it here, though I was sensible this is
not directly its proper place. And indeed, these examples
show, how important it is that young people should receive a
liberal and virtuous education; and the great benefit they
reap, by frequenting and corresponding early with persons of
merit; for these were the foundations whereon were built the
fame and glory which have rendered Scipio immortal. But
above all, how noble a model for our age (in which the most
inconsiderable and even trifling concerns often create feuds
and animosities between brothers and sisters, and disturb the
peace of families,) is the generous disinterestedness of Scipio;
who, whenever he had an opportunity of serving his relations,
thought lightly of bestowing the largest sums upon them!
This excellent passage of Polybius had escaped me, by its not
being inserted in the folio edition of his works. It belongs
indeed naturally to that book, where, treating of the taste for
solid glory, I mentioned the contempt in which the ancients
held riches, and the excellent use they made of them. I therefore
thought myself indispensably obliged to restore, on this
occasion, to young students, what I could not but blame
myself for omitting elsewhere.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The History of the Family and Posterity of Masinissa.</hi>&mdash;I
promised, after finishing what related to the republic of Carthage,
to return to the family and posterity of Masinissa. This
piece of history forms a considerable part of that of Africa,
and therefore is not quite foreign to my subject.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3857. A. Rom. 601.</note>
From the time that Masinissa had declared for the Romans
under the first Scipio, he had always adhered to that
honourable alliance, with an almost unparalleled zeal
and fidelity.<note place='foot'>Appian, p. 65. Val. Max. l.
v. c. 2.</note> Finding his end approaching, he wrote
to the proconsul of Africa, under whose standards the younger
Scipio then fought, to desire that Roman might be sent to
him; adding, that he should die with satisfaction, if he could
but expire in his arms, after having made him executor to his
will. But believing that he should be dead, before it could be
possible for him to receive this consolation, he sent for his
wife and children, and spoke to them as follows: <q>I know no
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
other nation but the Romans, and, among this nation, no
other family but that of the Scipios. I now, in my expiring
moments, empower Scipio Æmilianus to dispose, in an absolute
manner, of all my possessions, and to divide my kingdom
among my children. I require, that whatever Scipio may
decree, shall be executed as punctually as if I myself had
appointed it by my will.</q> After saying these words, he
breathed his last, being upwards of ninety years of age.
</p>

<p>
This prince, during his youth, had met with strange reverses
of fortune, having been dispossessed of his kingdom,
obliged to fly from province to province, and a thousand times
in danger of his life.<note place='foot'>Appian, p.
65.</note> Being supported, says the historian, by
the divine protection, he was afterwards favoured, till his
death, with a perpetual series of prosperity, unruffled by any
sinister accident: for he not only recovered his own kingdom,
but added to it that of Syphax his enemy; and extending his
dominions from Mauritania, as far as Cyrene, he became the
most powerful prince of all Africa. He was blessed, till he
left the world, with the greatest health and vigour, which
doubtless was owing to his extreme temperance, and the care
he had taken to inure himself to fatigue. Though ninety
years of age, he performed all the exercises used by young
men,<note place='foot'>Cicero introduces Cato,
speaking as follows of Masinissa's vigorous constitution:
Arbitror te audire, Scipio, hospes tuus Masinissa quæ faciat hodie nonaginta annos
natus; cùm ingressus iter pedibus sit, in equum omnino non ascendere; cùm equo,
ex equo non descendere; nullo imbre, nullo frigore adduci, ut capite operto sit;
summam esse in eo corporis siccitatem. Itaque exequi omnia regis officia et munera.
<hi rend='italic'>De Senectute.</hi>&mdash;Trans.</note>
and always rode without a saddle; and Polybius observes,
(a circumstance preserved by Plutarch,<note place='foot'>An
seni gerenda sit Resp. p. 791.</note>) that the day after a
great victory over the Carthaginians, Masinissa was seen,
sitting at the door of his tent, eating a piece of brown bread.
</p>

<p>
He left fifty-four sons, of whom three only were legitimate,
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> Micipsa, Gulussa, and
Mastanabal.<note place='foot'>Appian ibid. Val. Max. l. v. c.
2.</note> Scipio divided the
kingdom between these three, and gave considerable possessions
to the rest: but the two last dying soon after, Micipsa
became sole possessor of these extensive dominions. He had
two sons, Adherbal and Hiempsal, and with them he educated
in his palace Jugurtha his nephew, Mastanabal's son, and took
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
as much care of him as he did of his own children.<note place='foot'>All
this history of Jugurtha is extracted from Sallust.&mdash;Trans.</note> This
last-mentioned prince possessed several eminent qualities,
which gained him universal esteem. Jugurtha, who was finely
shaped, and very handsome, of the most delicate wit, and the
most solid judgment, did not devote himself, as young men
commonly do, to a life of luxury and pleasure. He used to
exercise himself with persons of his own age, in running,
riding, and throwing the javelin; and though he surpassed all
his companions, there was not one of them but loved him.
The chase was his only delight; but it was that of lions and
other savage beasts. To finish his character, he excelled in
all things, and spoke very little of himself: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Plurimum
facere, et mininum ipse de se loqui</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Merit so conspicuous, and so generally acknowledged, began
to excite some anxiety in Micipsa. He saw himself in the
decline of life, and his children very young. He knew the
prodigious lengths which ambition is capable of going, when a
crown is in view: and that a man, with talents much inferior
to those of Jugurtha, might be dazzled by so glittering a temptation,
especially when united with such favourable circumstances.<note place='foot'>Terrebat
eum natura mortalium avida imperii, et præceps ad explendam animi
cupidinem: præterea opportunitas suæ liberorumque ætatis, quæ etiam mediocres
viros spe prædæ transversos agit. <hi rend='italic'>Sallust.</hi>&mdash;Trans.</note>
In order therefore to remove a competitor so dangerous
with regard to his children, he gave Jugurtha the
command of the forces which he sent to the assistance of the
Romans, who, at that time, were besieging Numantia, under
the conduct of Scipio. Knowing Jugurtha was actuated by
the most heroic bravery, he flattered himself, that he probably
would rush upon danger, and lose his life. However, he was
mistaken. This young prince joined to an undaunted courage,
the utmost presence of mind; and, a circumstance very rarely
found in persons of his age, he preserved a just medium
between a timorous foresight and an impetuous rashness.<note place='foot'>Ac sanè,
quod difficillimum imprimis est, et prælio strenuus erat, et bonus
consilio: quorum alterum ex providentiâ timorem, alterum ex audacià temeritatem
adferre plerumque solet.&mdash;Trans.</note>
In this campaign, he won the esteem and friendship of the
whole army. Scipio sent him back to his uncle with letters
of recommendation, and the most advantageous testimonials
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
of his conduct, after having given him very prudent advice
with regard to the course which he ought to pursue; for
knowing mankind so well, he, in all probability, had discovered
certain sparks of ambition in that prince, which he feared
would one day break out into a flame.
</p>

<p>
Micipsa, pleased with the high character that was sent him
of his nephew, changed his behaviour towards him, and resolved,
if possible, to win his affection by kindness. Accordingly
he adopted him; and by his will, made him joint-heir
with his two sons. When he found his end approaching, he
sent for all three, and bid them draw near his bed, where, in
presence of the whole court he put Jugurtha in mind of all his
kindness to him; conjuring him, in the name of the gods, to
defend and protect, on all occasions, his children; who, being
before related to him by the ties of blood, were now become
his brethren, by his (Micipsa's) bounty. He told him,<note place='foot'>Non exercitus,
neque thesauri, præsidia regni sunt, verùm amici: Quos neque
armis cogere, neque auro parare queas; officio et fide pariuntur. Quis autem
amicior quàm frater fratri? aut quem alienum fidum invenies, si tuis hostis
fueris?&mdash;Trans.</note> that
neither arms nor treasure constitute the strength of a kingdom,
but friends, who are not won by arms nor gold, but by real
services and inviolable fidelity. Now where (says he) can we
find better friends than our brothers? And how can that
man, who becomes an enemy to his relations, repose any confidence
in, or depend on, strangers? He exhorted his sons
to pay the highest reverence to Jugurtha; and to dispute no
otherwise with him, than by their endeavour to equal, and,
if possible, to surpass his exalted merit. He concluded with
entreating them to observe for ever an inviolable attachment
towards the Romans; and to consider them as their benefactor,
their patron, and master. A few days after this, Micipsa
expired.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3887. A. Rom. 631.</note>
Jugurtha soon threw off the mask, and began by ridding
himself of Hiempsal, who had expressed himself to
him with great freedom, and therefore he caused
him to be murdered. This bloody action proved but
too evidently to Adherbal what he himself might naturally
fear.<note place='margin'>A.M. 3888. A. Rom. 632.</note>
Numidia is now divided, and sides severally
with the two brothers. Mighty armies are raised by
each party. Adherbal, after losing the greatest part
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
of his fortresses, is vanquished in battle, and forced to make
Rome his asylum. However, this gave Jugurtha no very
great uneasiness, as he knew that money was all-powerful in
that city. He therefore sent deputies thither, with orders for
them to bribe the chief senators. In the first audience to
which they were introduced, Adherbal represented the unhappy
condition to which he was reduced, the injustice and barbarity
of Jugurtha, the murder of his brother, the loss of almost all
his fortresses; but the circumstance on which he laid the
greatest stress was, the commands of his dying father, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> to
put his whole confidence in the Romans; declaring, that the
friendship of this people would be a stronger support both to
himself and his kingdom, than all the troops and treasures in
the universe. His speech was of a great length, and extremely
pathetic. Jugurtha's deputies made only the following
answer: that Hiempsal had been killed by the Numidians,
because of his great cruelty; that Adherbal was the aggressor,
and yet, after having been vanquished, was come to make
complaints, because he had not committed all the excesses he
desired; that their sovereign entreated the senate to form a
judgment of his behaviour and conduct in Africa, from that he
had shown at Numantia; and to lay a greater stress on his
actions, than on the accusations of his enemies. But these
ambassadors had secretly employed an eloquence much more
prevalent than that of words, which had not proved ineffectual.
The whole assembly was for Jugurtha, a few senators excepted,
who were not so void of honour as to be corrupted by money.
The senate came to this resolution, that commissioners should
be sent from Rome, to divide the provinces equally upon the
spot between the two brothers. The reader will naturally
suppose, that Jugurtha was not sparing of his treasure on this
occasion; the division was made to his advantage; and yet a
specious appearance of equity was preserved.
</p>

<p>
This first success of Jugurtha augmented his courage, and
increased his boldness. Accordingly, he attacked his brother
by open force; and whilst the latter loses his time in sending
deputations to the Romans, he storms several fortresses, carries
on his conquests; and, after defeating Adherbal, besieges him
in Cirtha, the capital of his kingdom. During this interval
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
ambassadors arrived from Rome, with orders, in the name of
the senate and people, to the two kings, to lay down their
arms, and cease all hostilities. Jugurtha, after protesting that
he would obey, with the most profound reverence and submission,
the commands of the Roman people, added, that he did
not believe it was their intention to hinder him from defending
his own life against the treacherous snares which his brother
had laid for it. He concluded with saying, that he would
send ambassadors forthwith to Rome, to inform the senate
of his conduct. By this vague answer he eluded their
orders, and would not even permit the deputies to wait upon
Adherbal.
</p>

<p>
Though the latter was so closely blocked up in his capital,
he yet<note place='foot'>He chose two of the
nimblest of those who had followed him into Cirtha; and
these, induced by the great rewards he promised them, and pitying his unhappy
circumstances, undertook to pass through the enemy's camp, in the night, to the
neighbouring shore, and from thence to Rome. Ex iis qui unâ Cirtam profugerant,
duos maximè impigros delegit: eos, multa pollicendo, ac miserando casum suum,
confirmat, ubi per hostium munitiones noctu ad proximum mare, dein Romam
pergerent. Sallust.&mdash;Trans.</note> found means to send
to Rome, to implore the assistance
of the Romans against his brother, who had besieged him
five months, and intended to take away his life. Some senators
were of opinion, that war ought to be proclaimed immediately
against Jugurtha; but still his influence prevailed, and the
Romans only ordered an embassy to be sent, composed of
senators of the highest distinction, among whom was Æmilius
Scaurus, a factious man, who had a great ascendant over the
nobility, and concealed the blackest vices under the specious
appearance of virtue. Jugurtha was terrified at first; but he
again found an opportunity to elude their demands, and accordingly
sent them back without coming to any conclusion. Upon
this, Adherbal, who had lost all hopes, surrendered upon
condition of having his life spared; nevertheless, he was
immediately murdered with a great number of Numidians.
</p>

<p>
But though the greatest part of the people at Rome were
struck with horror at this news, Jugurtha's money again
obtained him defenders in the senate. However, C. Memmius,
the tribune of the people, an active man, and one who hated
the nobility, prevailed with the people not to suffer so horrid
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3894. A. Rom. 683. Ant. J.C. 110.</note>
a crime to go unpunished; and, accordingly, war being proclaimed
against Jugurtha, Calpurnius Bestia, the consul, was
appointed to carry it on.<note place='foot'>Multæ bonæque artes
animi et corporis erant, quas omnes avaritia
præpediebat.&mdash;Trans.</note> He was endued with
excellent qualities, but they were all depraved and
rendered useless by his avarice. Scaurus set out
with him. They at first took several towns; but
Jugurtha's bribes checked the progress of these conquests;
and Scaurus<note place='foot'>Magnitudine pecuniæ à
bono honestoque in pravum abstractus est.&mdash;Trans.</note>
himself, who till now had expressed the strongest
animosity against this prince, could not resist so powerful an
attack. A treaty was therefore concluded; Jugurtha feigned
to submit to the Romans, and thirty elephants, some horses,
with a very inconsiderable sum of money, were delivered to
the quæstor.
</p>

<p>
But now the indignation of the people in general at Rome
displayed itself in the strongest manner. Memmius the tribune
inflamed them by his speeches. He caused Cassius, who was
prætor, to be appointed to attend Jugurtha; and to engage
him to come to Rome, under the guarantee of the Romans, in
order that an inquiry might be made in his presence, who those
persons were that had taken bribes. Accordingly, Jugurtha
was forced to come to Rome. The sight of him raised the
anger of the people still higher; but a tribune having been
bribed, he prolonged the session, and at last dissolved it. A
Numidian prince, grandson of Masinissa, called Massiva, being
at that time in the city, was advised to solicit for Jugurtha's
kingdom; which coming to the ears of the latter, he caused
him to be assassinated in the midst of Rome. The murderer
was seized, and delivered up to the civil magistrate, and
Jugurtha was commanded to depart Italy. Upon leaving the
city, he cast back his eyes several times towards it, and said,
<q>Rome would sell itself could it meet with a purchaser; and
were one to be found, it were inevitably ruined.</q><note place='foot'>Postquam
Româ egressus est, fertur sæpe tacitus eò respiciens, postremò dixisse.
Urbem venalem et maturè perituram, si emptorem invenerit.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
And now the war broke out anew. At first the indolence,
or perhaps connivance, of Albinus the consul, made it go on
very slowly; but afterwards, when he returned to Rome to hold
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
the public assemblies,<note place='foot'>For electing
magistrates. Sal.&mdash;Trans.</note> the Roman army, by the unskilfulness
of his brother Aulus, having marched into a defile from whence
there was no getting out, surrendered ignominiously to the
enemy, who forced the Romans to submit to the ceremony of
passing under the yoke, and made them engage to leave
Numidia in ten days.
</p>

<p>
The reader will naturally imagine in what light so shameful
a peace, concluded without the authority of the people, was
considered at Rome. They could not flatter themselves with
the hope of being successful in this war, till the conduct of it
was given to L. Metellus the consul.<note place='foot'>In Numidiam
proficiscitur, magmâ spe civium, cùm propter artes bonas, tum
maximè quòd adversùm divitias invictum animum gerebat.&mdash;Trans.</note>
To all the rest of the
virtues which constitute the great captain, he added a perfect
disregard of wealth; a quality most essentially requisite against
such an enemy as Jugurtha, who hitherto had always been
victorious, rather by money than his sword. But the African
monarch found Metellus as invincible in this, as in all other
respects. He therefore was forced to venture his life, and
exert his utmost bravery, through the defect of an expedient
which now began to fail him. Accordingly, he signalized
himself in a surprising manner; and showed in this campaign,
all that could be expected from the courage, abilities, and
attention of an illustrious general, to whom despair adds new
vigour, and suggests new lights: he was, however, unsuccessful,
because opposed by a consul, who did not suffer the most
inconsiderable error to escape him, nor ever let slip an opportunity
of taking advantage of the enemy.
</p>

<p>
Jugurtha's greatest concern was, how to secure himself from
traitors. From the time he had been told that Bomilcar, in
whom he reposed the utmost confidence, had a design upon
his life, he enjoyed no peace. He did not believe himself safe
any where; but all things, by day as well as by night, the
citizen as well as the foreigner, were suspected by him; and
the blackest terrors sat for ever brooding over his mind. He
never got a wink of sleep, except by stealth; and often changed
his bed in a manner unbecoming his rank. Starting sometimes
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
from his slumbers, he would snatch his sword, and utter loud
cries; so strongly was he haunted by fear, which almost drove
him to frenzy.
</p>

<p>
Marius was Metellus's lieutenant. His boundless ambition
induced him to endeavour to lessen his general's character
secretly in the minds of his soldiers; and becoming soon his
professed enemy and slanderer, he at last, by the most grovelling
and perfidious arts, prevailed so far as to supplant Metellus,
and get himself nominated in his room, to carry on the war
against Jugurtha.<note place='foot'>Quibus rebus supra
bonum atque honestum perculsus, neque lacrymas tenere,
neque moderari linguam: vir egregius in aliis artibus, nimis molliter
ægritudinem pati.&mdash;Trans.</note> With what strength of mind soever
Metellus might be endued on other occasions, he was totally
dejected by this unforeseen blow, which even forced tears from
his eyes, and compelled him to utter such expressions as were
altogether unworthy so great a man. There was something
very dark and vile in Marius's conduct, that displays ambition
in its native and genuine colours, and shows that it extinguishes,
in those who abandon themselves to it, all sense of honour and
integrity.<note place='margin'>A.M. 3898. A. Rom. 642.</note>
Metellus, having anxiously endeavoured to avoid a
man whose sight he could not bear, arrived in Rome,
and was received there with universal acclamations.
A triumph was decreed him, and the surname of
Numidicus conferred upon him.
</p>

<p>
I thought it would be proper to reserve for the Roman
history, a particular account of the events that happened in
Africa, under Metellus and Marius, all which are very circumstantially
described by Sallust, in his admirable history of
Jugurtha. I therefore hasten to the conclusion of this war.
</p>

<p>
Jugurtha being greatly distressed in his affairs, had recourse
to Bocchus king of Mauritania, whose daughter he had
married. This country extends from Numidia, as far as
beyond the shores of the Mediterranean opposite to Spain.<note place='foot'>Now
comprehending Fez, Morocco, &amp;c.&mdash;Trans.</note>
The Roman name was scarce known in it, and the people were
absolutely unknown to the Romans. Jugurtha insinuated to
his father-in-law, that should he suffer Numidia to be conquered,
his kingdom would doubtless be involved in its ruin;
especially as the Romans, who were sworn enemies to monarchy,
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
seemed to have vowed the destruction of all the thrones
in the universe. He, therefore, prevailed with Bocchus to
enter into a league with him; and accordingly received, on different
occasions, very considerable succours from that king.
</p>

<p>
This confederacy, which was cemented on either side by no
other tie than that of interest, had never been strong; and a
last defeat which Jugurtha met with, broke at once all the
bands of it. Bocchus now meditated the dark design of delivering
up his son-in-law to the Romans. For this purpose he
had desired Marius to send him a trusty person. Sylla, who
was an officer of uncommon merit, and served under him
as quæstor, was thought every way qualified for this negotiation.
He was not afraid to put himself into the hands of the
barbarian king; and accordingly set out for his court. Being
arrived, Bocchus, who, like the rest of his countrymen, did not
pride himself on sincerity, and was for ever projecting new
designs, debated within himself, whether it would not be his
interest to deliver up Sylla to Jugurtha. He was a long time
fluctuating in this uncertainty, and conflicting with a contrariety
of sentiments: and the sudden changes which displayed
themselves in his countenance, in his air, and in his whole
person, showed evidently how strongly his mind was affected.
At length, returning to his first design, he made his terms with
Sylla, and delivered up Jugurtha into his hands, who was sent
immediately to Marius.
</p>

<p>
Sylla, says Plutarch,<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>in vit.
Marii.</hi></note><note place='foot'>Οἶα νέος φιλότιμος, ἄρτι δόξης
γεγευμένος, οὐκ ἤνεγκε μετρίως τό εὐτύχημα. Plut.
<hi rend='italic'>Præcept. reip. gerend.</hi> p. 806.&mdash;Trans.</note>
acted, on this occasion, like a young
man fired with a strong thirst of glory, the sweets of which he
had just begun to taste. Instead of ascribing to the general
under whom he fought all the honour of this event, as his
duty required, and which ought to be an inviolable maxim, he
reserved the greatest part of it to himself, and had a ring made,
which he always wore, wherein he was represented receiving
Jugurtha from the hands of Bocchus; and this ring he used
ever after as his signet. But Marius was so highly exasperated
at this kind of insult, that he could never forgive him; and
this circumstance gave rise to the implacable hatred between
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg4310'/>
these two Romans, which afterwards broke out with so much
fury, and cost the republic so much blood.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3901. A. Rom. 615. Ant. J.C. 103.</note>
Marius entered Rome in triumph,<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>in
vit. Marii.</hi></note> exhibiting such a spectacle
to the Romans, as they could scarce believe
they saw, when it passed before their eyes; I mean,
Jugurtha in chains; that so formidable an enemy,
during whose life they had not dared to flatter themselves
with the hopes of being able to put an end to this war;
so well was his courage sustained by stratagem and artifice, and
his genius so fruitful in finding new expedients, even when his
affairs were most desperate. We are told, that Jugurtha ran
distracted, as he was walking in the triumph; that after the
ceremony was ended, he was thrown into prison; and that the
lictors were so eager to seize his robe, that they rent it in
several pieces, and tore away the tips of his ears, to get the
rich jewels with which they were adorned. In this condition
he was cast, quite naked, and in the utmost terrors, into a deep
dungeon, where he spent six days in struggling with hunger
and the fear of death, retaining a strong desire of life to his
last gasp; an end, continues Plutarch, worthy of his wicked
deeds, Jugurtha having been always of opinion, that the greatest
crimes might be committed to satiate his ambition; ingratitude,
perfidy, black treachery, and inhuman barbarity.
</p>

<p>
Juba, king of Mauritania, reflected so much honour on
polite literature and the sciences, that I could not, without
impropriety, omit him in the history of the family of Masinissa,
to whom his father, who also was named Juba, was great grandson,
and grandson of Gulussa. The elder Juba signalized
himself in the war between Cæsar and Pompey, by his inviolable
attachment to the party of the latter.<note place='margin'>A.M. 3959. A. Rom. 703.</note>
He slew himself after the battle of Thapsus, in which
his forces and those of Scipio were entirely defeated.
Juba, his son, then a child, was delivered up to the conqueror,
and was one of the most conspicuous ornaments of his
triumph. It appears from history, that a noble education was
bestowed upon Juba in Rome, where he imbibed such a variety
of knowledge, as afterwards equalled him to the most learned
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
among<note place='margin'>A.M. 3974. A. Rom. 719. Ant. J.C. 30.</note>
the Grecians. He did not leave that city till he went
to take possession of his father's dominions. Augustus
restored them to him, when, by the death of Mark
Antony, the provinces of the empire were absolutely
at his disposal. Juba, by the lenity of his government,
gained the hearts of all his subjects; who, out of a
grateful sense of the felicity they had enjoyed during his reign,
ranked him in the number of their gods. Pausanias speaks of
a statue which the Athenians erected in his honour. It was,
indeed just, that a city, which had been consecrated in all ages
to the Muses, should give public testimonies of its esteem for
a king who made so bright a figure among the learned.
Suidas ascribes<note place='foot'>In voce Ἰόβας.&mdash;Trans.</note>
several works to this prince, of which only
the fragments are now extant. He had written the history of
Arabia; the antiquities of Assyria, and those of the Romans;
the history of theatres, of painting and painters; of the nature
and properties of different animals, of grammar, and similar
subjects; a catalogue of all which is given in Abbé Sevin's
short dissertation on the life and works of the younger Juba,<note place='foot'>Vol.
IV of the <hi rend='italic'>Memoirs of the Academy of Belles
Lettres</hi>, p. 457.&mdash;Trans.</note>
whence I have extracted these few particulars.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Book the Third. The History of the Assyrians.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. The First Empire of the Assyrians.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sect. I. Duration of that Empire.</hi>&mdash;The
Assyrian empire was undoubtedly one of the most
powerful in the world. With respect to its duration, two
opinions have chiefly prevailed. Some authors, as Ctesias,
whose opinion is followed by Justin, give it a duration of
thirteen hundred years: others reduce it to five hundred and
twenty, of which number is Herodotus. The diminution, or
probably the interruption of power, which happened in this
vast empire, might possibly give occasion to this difference of
opinions, and may perhaps serve in some measure to reconcile
them.
</p>

<p>
The history of those early times is so obscure, the monuments
which convey it down to us so contrary to each other,
and the systems of the moderns<note place='foot'>They that
are curious to make deeper researches into this matter, may read the
dissertations of Abbé Banier and M. Freret upon the Assyrian empire, in the
<hi rend='italic'>Memoirs of the Academy of Belles Lettres</hi>; for
the first, see tome 3, and for the other, tome 5; as also what Father
Tournemine has written upon this subject in his edition of
Menochius.&mdash;Trans.</note> upon that matter so different,
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
that it is difficult to lay down any opinion about it, as certain
and incontestable. But where certainty is not to be had, I
suppose a reasonable person will be satisfied with probability;
and, in my opinion, a man can hardly be deceived, if he makes
the Assyrian empire equal in antiquity with the city of Babylon,
its capital. Now we learn from the holy Scripture, that this
was built by Nimrod, who certainly was a great conqueror, and
in all probability the first and most ancient of all those who
have ever aspired after that denomination.
</p>

<p>
The Babylonians, as Callisthenes, a philosopher in
Alexander's retinue, wrote to Aristotle,<note place='foot'>Porphyr.
apud Simplic. in l. ii. <hi rend='italic'>de cœlo</hi>.</note> reckoned themselves
to be at least of 1903 years' standing, when that prince entered
triumphant into Babylon; which makes their origin reach back
to the year of the world 1771, that is to say, 115 years after
the deluge. This computation comes within a few years of
the time in which we suppose Nimrod to have founded that
city. Indeed, this testimony of Callisthenes, as it does not
agree with any other accounts of that empire, is not esteemed
authentic by the learned; but the conformity we find between
it and the holy Scriptures should make us regard it.
</p>

<p>
Upon these grounds, I think we may allow Nimrod to have
been the founder of the first Assyrian empire, which subsisted
with more or less extent and glory upwards of 1450 years,<note place='foot'>Here
I depart from the opinion of Archbishop Usher, my ordinary guide, with
respect to the duration of the Assyrian empire, which he supposes, with Herodotus,
to have lasted but 520 years; but the time when Nimrod lived and Sardanapalus
died I take from him.&mdash;Trans.</note>
from the time of Nimrod to that of Sardanapalus, the last
king, that is to say, from the year of the world 1800 to the
year 3257.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Nimrod. A.M. 1800. Ant. J.C. 2204.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Nimrod</hi>. He is the same with Belus,<note place='foot'>Belus
or Baal signifies Lord.&mdash;Trans.</note> who
was afterwards worshipped as a god under that
appellation.
</p>

<p>
He was the son of Chus, grandson of Ham, and great grandson
of Noah. He was, says the Scripture, <q>a mighty hunter
before the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. x. 9.</note>
In applying himself to this laborious and
dangerous exercise, he had two things in view; the first was,
to gain the people's affection by delivering them from the fury
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
and dread of wild beasts; the next was, to train up numbers of
young people by this exercise of hunting to endure labour and
hardship, to form them to the use of arms, to inure them to a
kind of discipline and obedience, that at a proper time, after
they had been accustomed to his orders and seasoned in arms,
he might make use of them for other purposes more serious
than hunting.
</p>

<p>
In ancient history we find some footsteps remaining of this
artifice of Nimrod, whom the writers have confounded with
Ninus, his son: for Diodorus has these words:<note place='foot'>Lib.
ii. p. 90.</note> <q>Ninus, the
most ancient of the Assyrian kings mentioned in history, performed
great actions. Being naturally of a warlike disposition,
and ambitious of the glory that results from valour, he armed
a considerable number of young men, that were brave and
vigorous like himself; trained them up a long time in laborious
exercises and hardships, and by that means accustomed
them to bear the fatigues of war patiently, and to face dangers
with courage and intrepidity.</q>
</p>

<p>
What the same author adds,<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note> that Ninus entered into an
alliance with the king of the Arabs, and joined forces with
him, is a piece of ancient tradition, which informs us, that the
sons of Chus, and by consequence, the brothers of Nimrod, all
settled themselves in Arabia, along the Persian gulf, from
Havilah to the Ocean; and lived near enough to their brother
to lend him succours, or to receive them from him. And what
the same historian further says of Ninus, that he was the first
king of the Assyrians, agrees exactly with what the Scripture
says of Nimrod, <q>that he began to be mighty upon the earth;</q>
that is, he procured himself settlements, built cities, subdued
his neighbours, united different people under one and the same
authority, by the band of the same polity and the same laws,
and formed them into one state; which, for those early times,
was of a considerable extent, though bounded by the rivers
Euphrates and Tigris; and which, in succeeding ages, made
new acquisitions by degrees, and at length extended its conquests
very far.
</p>

<p>
<q>The capital city of his kingdom,</q> says the Scripture,<note place='foot'>Gen.
x. 10.</note> <q>was Babylon.</q> Most of the profane historians ascribe the
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
founding of Babylon to Semiramis,<note place='foot'>Semiramis eam
condiderat, vel, ut plerique tradidere, Belus, enjus regia ostenditar.
Q. Curt. l. v. c. 1.&mdash;Trans.</note> others to Belus. It is
evident, that both the one and the other are mistaken, if they
speak of the first founder of that city; for it owes its beginning
neither to Semiramis nor to Nimrod, but to the foolish
vanity of those persons mentioned in Scripture,<note place='foot'>Gen.
xi. 4.</note> who desired
to build a tower and a city, that should render their memory
immortal.
</p>

<p>
Josephus relates,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist.
Jud.</hi> l. i. c. 4.</note> upon the testimony of a Sibyl, (who must
have been very ancient, and whose fictions cannot be imputed
to the indiscreet zeal of any Christians,) that the gods threw
down the tower by an impetuous wind, or a violent hurricane.
Had this been the case, Nimrod's temerity must have been still
greater, to rebuild a city and a tower which God himself had
overthrown with such marks of his displeasure. But the Scripture
says no such thing; and it is very probable, the building
remained in the condition it was, when God put an end to the
work by the confusion of languages; and that the tower consecrated
to Belus, which is described by Herodotus,<note place='foot'>Lib.
i. c. 181.</note> was this very tower, which the sons of men pretended to raise to the
clouds.
</p>

<p>
It is further probable, that this ridiculous design having been
defeated by such an astonishing prodigy, as none could be the
author of but God himself, every body abandoned the place,
which had given Him offence; and that Nimrod was the first
who encompassed it afterwards with walls, settled therein his
friends and confederates, and subdued those that lived round
about it, beginning his empire in that place, but not confining
it to so narrow a compass: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fuit principium regni ejus
Babylon</foreign>. The other cities, which the Scripture speaks of in the
same place, were in the land of Shinar, which was certainly the
province of which Babylon became the metropolis.
</p>

<p>
From this country he went into that which has the name of
Assyria, and there built Nineveh: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De terrâ illâ
egressus est Assur, et ædificavit Nineven</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Gen. x.
11.</note> This is the sense in which many
learned men understand the word Assur, looking upon it as
the name of a province, and not of the first man who possessed
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
it, as if it were, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>egressus
est in Assur, in Assyriam</foreign>. And this
seems to be the most natural construction, for many reasons
not necessary to be recited in this place. The country of
Assyria is described, in one of the prophets,<note place='foot'>Mic.
v. 6.</note> by the particular character of being the land of Nimrod:
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Et pascent terram
Assur in gladio, et terram, Nimrod in lanceis ejus; et liberabit
ab Assur, cùm venerit in terram nostram</foreign>. It derived its
name from Assur the son of Shem, who, without doubt, had
settled himself and family there, and was probably driven out,
or brought under subjection, by the usurper Nimrod.
</p>

<p>
This conqueror having possessed himself of the provinces of
Assur,<note place='foot'>Gen. x. 11, 12.</note> did
not ravage them like a tyrant, but filled them with
cities, and made himself as much beloved by his new subjects
as he was by his old ones; so that the historians,<note place='foot'>Diod.
l. ii. p. 90.</note> who have
not examined into the bottom of this affair, have thought that
he made use of the Assyrians to conquer the Babylonians.
Among other cities, he built one more large and magnificent
than the rest, which he called Nineveh, from the name of his
son Ninus, in order to immortalize his memory. The son, in
his turn, out of veneration for his father, was willing that they
who had served him as their king should adore him as their
god, and induce other nations to render him the same worship.
For it appears evident, that Nimrod is the famous Belus of the
Babylonians, the first king whom the people deified for his
great actions, and who showed others the way to that sort of
immortality which human acquirements are supposed capable
of bestowing.
</p>

<p>
I intend to speak of the mighty strength and greatness of
the cities of Babylon and Nineveh, under the kings to whom
their building is ascribed by profane authors, because the Scripture
says little or nothing on that subject. This silence of
Scripture, so little satisfactory to our curiosity, may become
an instructive lesson to our piety. The holy penman has
placed Nimrod and Abraham, as it were, in one view before us;
and seems to have put them so near together on purpose, that
we should see an example in the former of what is admired
and coveted by men, and in the latter of what is acceptable and
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
well-pleasing to God. These two persons,<note place='foot'>Fecerunt
civitates duas amores duo: terrenam scilicet amor sui usque ad contemptum
Dei; cœlestem verò amor Dei usque ad contemptum sui. S. Aug. <hi rend='italic'>de Civ.
Dei</hi>, l. xiv. c. 28.&mdash;Trans.</note> so unlike one
another, are the first two and chief citizens of two different
cities, built on different motives, and with different principles;
the one, self-love, and a desire of temporal advantages, carried
even to the contemning of the Deity; the other, the love of
God, even to the contemning of one's self.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ninus.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ninus</hi>.
I have already observed, that most of the profane
authors look upon him as the first founder of the Assyrian
empire, and for that reason ascribe to him a great
part of his father Nimrod's or Belus's actions.
</p>

<p>
Having a design to enlarge his conquests, the first thing he
did was to prepare troops and officers capable of promoting his
designs.<note place='foot'>Diod. l. ii. p. 90-95.</note>
And having received powerful succours from the
Arabians his neighbours, he took the field, and in the space of
seventeen years conquered a vast extent of country, from
Egypt as far as India and Bactriana, which he did not then
venture to attack.
</p>

<p>
At his return, before he entered upon any new conquests,
he conceived the design of immortalizing his name by the
building of a city answerable to the greatness of his power; he
called it Nineveh, and built it on the eastern banks of the
Tigris.<note place='foot'>Diodorus says it was on the bank
of the Euphrates, and speaks of it as if it was
so, in many places; but he is mistaken.&mdash;Trans.</note>
Possibly he did no more than finish the work his
father had begun. His design, says Diodorus, was to make
Nineveh the largest and noblest city in the world, and to put it
out of the power of those that came after him ever to build or
hope to build such another. Nor was he deceived in his view;
for never did any city come up to the greatness and magnificence
of this: it was one hundred and fifty stadia (or eighteen
miles three quarters) in length, and ninety stadia (or eleven
miles and one quarter) in breadth; and consequently was an
oblong square. Its circumference was four hundred and
eighty stadia, or sixty miles. For this reason we find it said
in the prophet Jonah, <q>That Nineveh was an exceeding great
city, of three days' journey;</q><note place='foot'>Jon. iii.
3.</note> which is to be understood of the
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
whole circuit, or compass of the city.<note place='foot'>It is
hard to believe that Diodorus does not speak of the extent of Nineveh with
some exaggeration; therefore some learned men have reduced the stadium to little
more than one half, and reckon fifteen of them to the Roman mile instead of eight,
the usual computation.&mdash;Trans.</note> The walls of it were a
hundred feet high, and of so considerable a thickness, that
three chariots might go abreast upon them with ease. They
were fortified, and adorned with fifteen hundred towers two
hundred feet high.
</p>

<p>
After he had finished this prodigious work, he resumed his
expedition against the Bactrians. His army, according to the
relation of Ctesias, consisted of seventeen hundred thousand foot,
two hundred thousand horse, and about sixteen thousand chariots
armed with scythes. Diodorus adds, that this ought not to
appear incredible, since, not to mention the innumerable armies
of Darius and Xerxes, the city of Syracuse alone, in the time of
Dionysius the Tyrant, furnished one hundred and twenty thousand
foot and twelve thousand horse, besides four hundred
vessels well equipped and provided. And a little before Hannibal's
time, Italy, including the citizens and allies, was able to send
into the field near a million of men. Ninus made himself master
of a great number of cities, and at last laid siege to Bactria,
the capital of the country. Here he would probably have seen
all his attempts miscarry, had it not been for the diligence and
assistance of Semiramis, wife to one of his chief officers, a
woman of an uncommon courage, and peculiarly exempt from
the weakness of her sex. She was born at Ascalon, a city of
Syria. I think it needless to recite the account Diodorus gives
of her birth, and of the miraculous manner of her being nursed
and brought up by pigeons, since that historian himself looks
upon it only as a fabulous story. It was Semiramis that
directed Ninus how to attack the citadel, and by her means he
took it, and thus became master of the city, in which he found
an immense treasure. The husband of Semiramis having
killed himself, to prevent the effects of the king's threats and
indignation, who had conceived a violent passion for his wife,
Ninus married her.
</p>

<p>
After his return to Nineveh, he had a son by her, whom he
called Ninyas. Not long after this he died, and left the queen
the government of the kingdom. She, in honour of his
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
memory, erected a magnificent monument, which remained a
long time after the ruin of Nineveh.
</p>

<p>
I find no appearance of truth in what some authors relate
concerning the manner of Semiramis's coming to the throne.<note place='foot'>Plut.
<hi rend='italic'>in Mor.</hi> p. 753.</note>
According to them, having secured the chief men of the state,
and attached them to her interest by her benefactions and promises,
she solicited the king with great importunity to put the
sovereign power into her hands for the space of five days. He
yielded to her entreaties, and all the provinces of the empire
were commanded to obey Semiramis. These orders were
executed but too exactly for the unfortunate Ninus, who was
put to death, either immediately or after some years' imprisonment.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Semiramis.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Semiramis</hi>.
This princess applied all her thoughts to immortalize
her name, and to cover the meanness of her
extraction by the greatness of her enterprises.<note place='foot'>Diod.
l. ii. p. 95.</note> She
proposed to herself to surpass all her predecessors in magnificence,
and to that end she undertook the building of the mighty
Babylon,<note place='foot'>We are not to wonder, if we find
the founding of a city ascribed to different persons. It is common,
even among the profane writers, to say, Such a prince
built such a city, whether he was the person that first founded it,
or that only embellished or enlarged it.&mdash;Trans.</note>
in which work she employed two millions of men,
which were collected out of all the provinces of her vast empire.
Some of her successors endeavoured to adorn that city with new
works and embellishments. I shall here speak of them all
together, in order to give the reader a more clear and distinct
idea of that stupendous city.
</p>

<p>
The principal works which rendered Babylon so famous, are
the walls of the city; the quays and the bridge; the lake,
banks, and canals, made for the draining of the river; the
palaces, hanging gardens, and the temple of Belus; works of
such a surprising magnificence, as is scarce to be comprehended.
Dr. Prideaux having treated this subject with great
extent and learning, I have only to copy, or rather abridge
him.
</p>

<p>
I. <hi rend='italic'>The Walls.</hi>&mdash;Babylon stood on a large plain, in a very
fat and rich soil.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. i. c. 178, 180. Diod.
l. ii. p. 95, 96. Q. Curt. l. v. c. 1.</note> The Avails were every way prodigious. They
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
were in thickness eighty-seven feet, in height three hundred
and fifty, and in compass four hundred and eighty furlongs,
which make sixty of our miles. These walls were drawn round
the city in the form of an exact square, each side of which was
one hundred and twenty furlongs,<note place='foot'>I relate things
as I find them in the ancient authors, which Dean Prideaux has
also done; but I cannot help believing that great abatements are to be made in what
they say as to the immense extent of Babylon and Nineveh.&mdash;Trans.</note>
or fifteen miles, in length,
and all built of large bricks cemented together with bitumen, a
glutinous slime arising out of the earth in that country, which
binds much stronger and firmer than mortar, and soon grows
much harder than the bricks or stones themselves which it
cements together.
</p>

<p>
These walls were surrounded on the outside with a vast ditch,
full of water, and lined with bricks on both sides. The earth
that was dug out of it made the bricks wherewith the walls
were built; and therefore, from the vast height and breadth of
the walls may be inferred the greatness of the ditch.
</p>

<p>
In every side of this great square were twenty-five gates,
that is, a hundred in all, which were all made of solid brass;
and hence it is, that when God promises to Cyrus the conquest
of Babylon, he tells him,<note place='foot'>Isa. xlv.
2.</note> that he would break in pieces before
him the gates of brass. Between every two of these gates were
three towers, and four more at the four corners of this great
square, and three between each of these corners and the next
gate on either side; every one of these towers was ten feet
higher than the walls. But this is to be understood only of
those parts of the wall where there was need of towers.
</p>

<p>
From the twenty-five gates in each side of this great square
went twenty-five streets, in straight lines to the gates, which
were directly over-against them, in the opposite side; so that
the whole number of the streets was fifty, each fifteen miles
long, whereof twenty-five went one way, and twenty-five the
other, directly crossing each other at right angles. And besides
these, there were also four half streets, which had houses only
on one side, and the wall on the other; these went round the
four sides of the city next the walls, and were each of them
two hundred feet broad; the rest were about a hundred and
fifty. By these streets thus crossing each other, the whole
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
city was cut out into six hundred and seventy-six squares, each
of which was four furlongs and a half on every side, that is,
two miles and a quarter in circumference. Round these
squares, on every side towards the street, stood the houses
(which were not contiguous, but had void spaces between
them,) all built three or four stories high, and beautified with
all manner of ornaments towards the streets.<note place='foot'>Quint.
Curt. l. v. c. 1.</note> The space
within in the middle of each square, was likewise all void
ground, employed for yards, gardens, and other such uses; so
that Babylon was greater in appearance than reality, near one
half of the city being taken up in gardens and other cultivated
lands, as we are told by Q. Curtius.
</p>

<p>
II. <hi rend='italic'>The Quays and Bridge.</hi>&mdash;A branch of the river
Euphrates ran quite cross the city, from the north to the south
side;<note place='foot'>Herod. l. i. c. 180 and 186.
Diod. l. ii. p. 96.</note> on each side of the river was a quay, and a high wall
built of brick and bitumen, of the same thickness as the walls
that went round the city. In these walls, over-against every
street that led to the river, were gates of brass, and from them
descents by steps to the river, for the conveniency of the
inhabitants, who used to pass over from one side to the other
in boats, having no other way of crossing the river before the
building of the bridge. The brazen gates were always open in
the daytime, and shut in the night.
</p>

<p>
The bridge was not inferior to any of the other buildings,
either in beauty or magnificence; it was a furlong in length,<note place='foot'>Diodorus
says, this bridge was five furlongs in length, which can hardly be true,
since the Euphrates was but one furlong broad. Strab. l. xvi. p 738.&mdash;Trans.</note>
and thirty feet in breadth, built with wonderful art, to supply
the defect of a foundation in the bottom of the river, which was
all sandy. The arches were made of huge stones, fastened
together with chains of iron and melted lead. Before they
began to build the bridge, they turned the course of the river,
and laid its channel dry, having another view in so doing,
besides that of laying the foundations more commodiously, as
I shall explain hereafter. And as every thing was prepared
beforehand, both the bridge and the quays, which I have already
described, were built in that interval.
</p>

<p>
III. <hi rend='italic'>The Lake, Ditches, and Canals, made for the draining
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
of the River.</hi>&mdash;These works, objects of admiration for the
skilful in all ages, were still more useful than magnificent.<note place='foot'>Strab.
l. xvi. p. 740. Plin. l. v. c. 26.</note>
In the beginning of the summer, on the sun's melting the
snow on the mountains of Armenia, there arises a vast increase
of waters, which, running into the Euphrates in the months of
June, July, and August, makes it overflow its banks, and
occasion such another inundation as the Nile does in Egypt.
To prevent the damage which both the city and country
received from these inundations, at a very considerable distance
above the town two artificial canals were cut, which turned the
course of these waters into the Tigris, before they reached
Babylon.<note place='foot'>Abyd. ap Eus. <hi rend='italic'>Prœp.
Evang.</hi> l. ix.</note> And to secure the country yet more from the
danger of inundations, and to keep the river within its channel,
they raised prodigious banks on both sides the river, built with
brick cemented with bitumen, which began at the head of the
artificial canals, and extended below the city.<note place='foot'>Abyd.
ib. Herod. l. i. c. 185.</note>
</p>

<p>
To facilitate the making of these works, it was necessary to
turn the course of the river, for which purpose, to the west of
Babylon, was dug a prodigious artificial lake, forty miles
square,<note place='foot'>The author follows Herodotus,
who makes it four hundred and twenty furlongs, or fifty-two miles
square; but I choose to follow Dean Prideaux, who prefers the account
of Megasthenes.&mdash;Trans.</note> one hundred and sixty in
compass, and thirty-five feet
deep, according to Herodotus, and seventy-five, according to
Megasthenes. Into this lake was the whole river turned, by
an artificial canal cut from the west side of it, till the whole
work was finished, when it was made to flow in its former
channel. But that the Euphrates, in the time of its increase,
might not overflow the city, through the gates on its sides, this
lake, with the canal from the river, was still preserved. The
water received into the lake at the time of these overflowings
was kept there all the year, as in a common reservoir, for the
benefit of the country, to be let out by sluices, at convenient
times for the watering of the lands below it. The lake, therefore,
was equally useful in defending the country from inundations,
and making it fertile. I relate the wonders of Babylon
as they are delivered down to us by the ancients; but there
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
are some of them which are scarce to be comprehended or
believed, of which number is the vast extent of the lake which
I have just described.
</p>

<p>
Berosus, Megasthenes, and Abydenus, quoted by Josephus
and Eusebius, make Nebuchadnezzar the author of most of
these works; but Herodotus ascribes the bridge, the two quays
of the river, and the lake, to Nitocris, the daughter-in-law of
that monarch. Perhaps Nitocris might finish what her father
left imperfect at his death, on which account that historian
might give her the honour of the whole undertaking.
</p>

<p>
IV. <hi rend='italic'>The Palaces, and Hanging Gardens.<note place='foot'>Diod.
l. ii. p. 96, 97.</note></hi>&mdash;At the two ends
of the bridge were two palaces, which had a communication
with each other by a vault, built under the channel of the river,
at the time of its being dry. The old palace, which stood on
the east side of the river, was thirty furlongs (or three miles
and three quarters) in compass; near which stood the temple
of Belus, of which we shall soon speak. The new palace,
which stood on the west side of the river, opposite to the other,
was sixty furlongs (or seven miles and a half) in compass. It
was surrounded with three walls, one within another, with
considerable spaces between them. These walls, as also those
of the other palace, were embellished with an infinite variety
of sculptures, representing all kinds of animals, to the life.
Amongst the rest was a curious hunting-piece, in which Semiramis
on horseback was throwing her javelin at a leopard, and
her husband Ninus piercing a lion.
</p>

<p>
In this last palace, were the hanging gardens, so celebrated
among the Greeks.<note place='foot'>Ibid. p. 98, 99. Strab.
l. xvi. p. 738. Quint. Curt. l. v. c. 1.</note> They contained a square of four hundred
feet on every side, and were carried up in the manner of several
large terraces, one above another, till the height equalled that
of the walls of the city. The ascent was from terrace to
terrace, by stairs ten feet wide. The whole pile was sustained
by vast arches, raised upon other arches, one above another,
and strengthened by a wall, surrounding it on every side, of
twenty-two feet in thickness. On the top of the arches were
first laid large flat stones, sixteen feet long, and four broad;
over these was a layer of reeds, mixed with a great quantity of
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
bitumen, upon which were two rows of bricks, closely cemented
together with plaster. The whole was covered with thick
sheets of lead, upon which lay the mould of the garden. And
all this floorage was contrived to keep the moisture of the
mould from running away through the arches. The earth laid
hereon was so deep, that the greatest trees might take root in
it; and with such the terraces were covered, as well as with
all other plants and flowers, that were proper to adorn a
pleasure-garden. In the upper terrace there was an engine,
or kind of pump, by which water was drawn up out of the
river, and from thence the whole garden was watered. In the
spaces between the several arches, upon which this whole
structure rested, were large and magnificent apartments, that
were very light, and had the advantage of a beautiful prospect.
</p>

<p>
Amytis, the wife of Nebuchadnezzar, having been bred in
Media, (for she was the daughter of Astyages, the king of that
country,) had been much delighted with the mountains and
woody parts of that country.<note place='foot'>Beros. ap.
Jos. <hi rend='italic'>cont. App.</hi> l. i. c. 6.</note> And as she desired to have
something like it in Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar, to gratify her,
caused this prodigious edifice to be erected: Diodoras gives
much the same account of the matter, but without naming
the persons.
</p>

<p>
V. <hi rend='italic'>The Temple of Belus.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. i. c. 181. Diod. l. ii. p. 98. Strab. l. xvi. p. 738.</note></hi>&mdash;Another
of the great works at Babylon was the temple of Belus, which stood, as I have
mentioned already, near the old palace. It was most remarkable
for a prodigious tower, that stood in the middle of it. At
the foundation, according to Herodotus, it was a square of a
furlong on each side, that is, half a mile in the whole compass,
and (according to Strabo) it was also a furlong in height. It
consisted of eight towers, built one above the other, decreasing
regularly to the top, for which reason Strabo calls the whole a
pyramid. It is not only asserted, but proved, that this tower
much exceeded the greatest of the pyramids of Egypt in height.
Therefore we have good reason to believe, as Bochart
asserts,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Phal</hi> part. 1 l. i. c. 9.</note>
that this is the very same tower which was built there at the
confusion of languages; and the rather, because it is attested
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
by several profane authors, that this tower was all built of
bricks and bitumen, as the Scriptures tell us the tower of
Babel was. The ascent to the top was by stairs on the outside
round it; that is, perhaps, there was an easy sloping ascent in
the side of the outer wall, which, turning by very slow degrees
in a spiral line eight times round the tower from the bottom to
the top, had the same appearance as if there had been eight
towers placed upon one another. In these different stories
were many large rooms, with arched roofs supported by pillars.
Over the whole, on the top of the tower, was an observatory,
by the benefit of which the Babylonians became more expert
in astronomy than all other nations, and made, in a short
time, the great progress in it ascribed to them in history.
</p>

<p>
But the chief use to which this tower was designed, was the
worship of the god Belus or Baal, as also that of several other
deities; for which reason there was a multitude of chapels in
different parts of the tower. The riches of this temple in
statues, tables, censers, cups, and other sacred vessels, all of
massy gold, were immense. Among other images, there was
one forty feet high, which weighed a thousand Babylonish
talents. The Babylonish talent, according to Pollux in his
<hi rend='italic'>Onomasticon</hi>, contained seven thousand Attic drachmas, and
consequently was a sixth part more than the Attic talent,
which contains but six thousand drachmas.
</p>

<p>
According to the calculation which Diodorus makes of the
riches contained in this temple, the sum total amounts to six
thousand three hundred Babylonish talents of gold.
</p>

<p>
The sixth part of six thousand three hundred is one thousand
and fifty; consequently six thousand three hundred Babylonish
talents of gold are equivalent to seven thousand three hundred
and fifty Attic talents of gold.
</p>

<p>
Now seven thousand three hundred and fifty Attic talents of
silver are worth upwards of two millions and one hundred
thousand pounds sterling. The proportion between gold and
silver among the ancients we reckon as ten to one; therefore
seven thousand three hundred and fifty Attic talents of gold
amount to above one and twenty millions sterling.
</p>

<p>
This temple stood till the time of Xerxes;<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. i. c. 183. Strab. l. xvi. p. 738. Arrian, l. vii. p. 480.</note> but he, on his
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
return from his Grecian expedition, demolished it entirely, after
having first plundered it of all its immense riches. Alexander,
on his return to Babylon from his Indian expedition, purposed
to have rebuilt it; and in order thereto, set ten thousand men
to work, to rid the place of its rubbish; but, after they had
laboured herein two months, Alexander died, and that put an
end to the undertaking.
</p>

<p>
Such were the chief works which rendered Babylon so
famous; the greater part of them are ascribed by profane
authors to Semiramis, to whose history it is now time to return.
</p>

<p>
When she had finished all these great undertakings, she
thought fit to make a progress through the several parts of her
empire;<note place='foot'>Diod. l. ii. p. 100-108.</note>
and, wherever she came, left monuments of her magnificence
by many noble structures which she erected, either
for the conveniency or ornament of her cities; she was particularly
careful to have water brought by aqueducts to such
places as wanted it, and to make the highways easy, by cutting
through mountains, and filling up valleys. In the time of
Diodorus, there were still monuments to be seen in many
places, with her name inscribed upon them.
</p>

<p>
The authority this queen had over her people seems very
extraordinary, since we find her presence alone capable of
appeasing a sedition.<note place='foot'>Val. Max. l. ix. c.
3.</note> One day, as she was dressing herself,
word was brought her of a tumult in the city. Whereupon
she went out immediately, with her head half dressed, and did
not return till the disturbance was entirely appeased. A statue
was erected in remembrance of this action, representing her in
that very attitude and undress, which had not hindered her
from flying to her duty.
</p>

<p>
Not satisfied with the vast extent of dominions left her by
her husband, she enlarged them by the conquest of a great
part of Æthiopia. Whilst she was in that country, she had
the curiosity to visit the temple of Jupiter Ammon, to inquire
of the oracle how long she had to live. According to Diodorus,
the answer she received was, that she should not die till her
son Ninyas conspired against her, and that after her death one
part of Asia would pay her divine honours.
</p>

<p>
Her greatest and last expedition was against India; on this
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
occasion she raised an innumerable army out of all the provinces
of her empire, and appointed Bactra for the rendezvous.
As the strength of the Indians consisted chiefly in their great
number of elephants, she caused a multitude of camels to be
accoutred in the form of elephants, in hopes of deceiving the
enemy. It is said that Perseus long after used the same stratagem
against the Romans; but neither of them succeeded in
this artifice. The Indian king having notice of her approach,
sent ambassadors to ask her who she was, and with what right,
having never received any injury from him, she came out of
wantonness to attack his dominions; adding, that her boldness
should soon meet with the punishment it deserved. Tell your
master (replied the queen) that in a little time I myself will
let him know who I am. She advanced immediately towards
the river<note place='foot'>Indus.&mdash;Trans.</note>
from which the country takes its name; and having
prepared a sufficient number of boats, she attempted to pass it
with her army. Their passage was a long time disputed, but
after a bloody battle she put her enemies to flight. Above a
thousand of their boats were sunk, and above a hundred thousand
of their men taken prisoners. Encouraged by this success,
she advanced directly into the country, leaving sixty thousand
men behind to guard the bridge of boats, which she had built
over the river. This was just what the king desired, who fled
on purpose to bring her to an engagement in the heart of his
country. As soon as he thought her far enough advanced, he
faced about, and a second engagement ensued, more bloody
than the first. The counterfeit elephants could not long sustain
the shock of the real ones: these routed her army, crushing
whatever came in their way. Semiramis did all that lay in
her power to rally and encourage her troops, but in vain. The
king, perceiving her engaged in the fight, advanced towards
her, and wounded her in two places, but not mortally. The
swiftness of her horse soon carried her beyond the reach of her
enemies. As her men crowded to the bridge, to repass the
river, great numbers of them perished, through the disorder
and confusion unavoidable on such occasions. When those
that could save themselves were safely over, she destroyed the
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
bridge, and by that means stopt the enemy; and the king
likewise, in obedience to an oracle, had given orders to his
troops not to pass the river, nor pursue Semiramis any farther.
The queen, having made an exchange of prisoners at Bactra,
returned to her own dominions with scarce one-third of her
army, which (according to Ctesias) consisted of three million
foot, and five hundred thousand horse, besides the camels and
chariots armed for war, of which she had a very considerable
number. I have no doubt that this account is highly exaggerated,
or that there is some mistake in the numeral characters.
She, and Alexander after her, were the only persons
that ever ventured to carry the war beyond the river Indus.
</p>

<p>
I must own, I am somewhat puzzled with a difficulty which
may be raised against the extraordinary things related of Ninus
and Semiramis, as they do not seem to agree with the times
so near the deluge: I mean, such vast armies, such a numerous
cavalry, so many chariots armed with scythes, and such
immense treasures of gold and silver; all which seem to be of
a later date. The same thing may likewise be said of the
magnificence of the buildings, ascribed to them. It is probable,
the Greek historians, who came so many ages afterwards,
deceived by the similarity of names, by their ignorance in
chronology, and the resemblance of one event with another,
may have ascribed such things to more ancient princes, as
belonged to those of a later date; or may have attributed a
number of exploits and enterprises to one, which ought to be
divided amongst a series of them, succeeding one another.
</p>

<p>
Semiramis, some time after her return, discovered that her
son was plotting against her, and one of her principal officers
had offered him his assistance. She then called to mind the
oracle of Jupiter Ammon; and believing that her end approached,
without inflicting any punishment on the officer, who
was taken into custody, she voluntarily abdicated the throne,
put the government into the hands of her son, and withdrew
from the sight of men, hoping speedily to have divine honours
paid to her according to the promise of the oracle. And
indeed we are told, she was worshipped by the Assyrians, under
the form of a dove. She lived sixty-two years, of which she
reigned forty-two.
</p>

<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>

<p>
There are in the <hi rend='italic'>Memoirs of the Academy of Belles
Lettres</hi><note place='foot'>Vol. iii. p. 343,
&amp;c.</note> two learned dissertations upon the Assyrian empire,
and particularly on the reign and actions of Semiramis.
</p>

<p>
What Justin<note place='foot'>Lib. i. c.
2.</note> says of Semiramis, namely, that after her
husband's decease, not daring either to commit the government
to her son, who was then too young, or openly to take it
upon herself, she governed under the name and habit of Ninyas,
and that, after having reigned in that manner above forty
years, falling passionately in love with her own son, she
endeavoured to induce him to comply with her criminal desires,
and was slain by him: all this, I say, is so void of all appearance
of truth, that to go about to confute it would be but
losing time. It must however be owned, that almost all the
authors who have spoken of Semiramis, give us but a disadvantageous
idea of her chastity.
</p>

<p>
I do not know but that the glorious reign of this queen
might partly induce Plato to maintain, in his Commonwealth,<note place='foot'>Lib.
v. <hi rend='italic'>de Rep.</hi> 451-457.</note>
that women as well as men ought to be admitted into the
management of public affairs, the conducting of armies, and
the government of states; and, by necessary consequence,
ought to be trained up in the same exercises as men, as well
for the forming of the body as the mind. Nor does he so much
as except those exercises, wherein it was customary to fight
stark naked, alleging<note place='foot'>Ἐπείτερ ἀρετὴν ἀντὶ
ἱματίων ἁμφιέσονται.</note> that the virtue of the sex would be a
sufficient covering for them.
</p>

<p>
It is just matter of surprise to find a philosopher so judicious
in other respects, openly combating the most common and
most natural maxims of modesty and decency, virtues which
are the principal ornament of the female sex, and insisting so
strongly upon a principle, sufficiently confuted by the constant
practice of all ages, and of almost all nations in the world.
</p>

<p>
Aristotle, wiser in this than his master Plato, without doing
the least injustice to the real merit and essential qualities of
the sex, has with great judgment marked<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
cura rei fam.</hi> l. i. c. 3.</note> out the different
ends to which man and woman are ordained, from the different
qualities of body and mind, wherewith they are endowed by the
Author of nature, who has given the one strength of body and
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
intrepidity of mind to enable him to undergo the greatest
hardships, and face the most imminent dangers; whilst the
other, on the contrary, is of a weak and delicate constitution,
accompanied with a natural softness and modest timidity,
which render her more fit for a sedentary life, and dispose her
to keep within the precincts of the house, and to employ herself
in the concerns of prudent and industrious economy.
</p>

<p>
Xenophon is of the same opinion with Aristotle;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
administr. dom.</hi> p. 839.</note> and in
order to set off the occupation of the wife, who confines herself
within her house, agreeably compares her to the mother-bee,
commonly called the queen-bee, who alone governs and
has the superintendence of the whole hive, who distributes all
their employments, encourages their industry, presides over
the building of their little cells, takes care of the nourishment
and subsistence of her numerous family; regulates the quantity
of honey appointed for that purpose, and at fixed and
proper seasons sends abroad the new swarms in colonies, to
ease and disburthen the hive of its superfluous inhabitants.
He remarks, with Aristotle, the difference of constitution and
inclinations, designedly made by the Author of nature between
man and woman, to point out to each of them their proper
and peculiar offices and functions.
</p>

<p>
This allotment, far from degrading or lessening the woman,
is really for her advantage and honour, in confiding to her a
kind of domestic empire and government, administered only
by gentleness, reason, equity, and good nature; and in giving
her frequent occasions of concealing the most valuable and
excellent qualities under the inestimable veil of modesty and
submission. For it must ingenuously be owned, that at all
times, and in all conditions, there have been women, who by
a real and solid merit have distinguished themselves above
their sex; as there have been innumerable instances of men,
who by their defects have dishonoured theirs. But these are
only particular cases, which form no rule, and which ought
not to prevail against an establishment founded in nature, and
prescribed by the Creator himself.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ninyas.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ninyas.</hi><note place='foot'>Diod.
l. ii. p. 108.</note> This prince was in no respect like those from
whom he received his birth, and to whose throne he
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
succeeded. Wholly intent upon his pleasures, he kept himself
shut up in his palace, and seldom showed himself to his people.
To keep them in their duty, he had always at Nineveh a certain
number of regular troops, furnished every year from the
several provinces of his empire, at the expiration of which
term they were succeeded by the like number of other troops
on the same conditions; the king putting a commander at the
head of them, on whose fidelity he could depend. He made
use of this method, that the officers might not have time to
gain the affections of the soldiers, and so form any conspiracies
against him.
</p>

<p>
His successors for thirty generations followed his example
and even surpassed him in indolence. Their history is absolutely
unknown, there remaining no footsteps of it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2092. Ant. J.C. 1912.</note>
In Abraham's time the Scripture speaks of Amraphael, king
of Shinar, the country where Babylon was situated,
who with two other princes followed Chedorlaomer,
king of the Elamites, whose tributary he probably
was, in the war carried on by the latter against five kings of
the land of Canaan.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2513. Ant. J.C. 1491.</note>
It was under the government of these inactive princes, that
Sesostris, king of Egypt, extended his conquests so
far in the East. But as his power was of a short
duration, and not supported by his successors, the
Assyrian empire soon returned to its former state.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2820. Ant. J.C. 1184.</note>
Plato, a curious observer of antiquities, makes the kingdom
of Troy, in the time of Priam, dependent on
the Assyrian empire.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Leg.</hi> l. iii. p 685.</note> And Ctesias says, that Teutamus,
the twentieth king after Ninyas, sent a considerable
body of troops to the assistance of the Trojans, under the
conduct of Memnon, the son of Tithonus, at a time when the
Assyrian empire had subsisted above a thousand years; which
agrees exactly with the time, wherein I have placed the foundation
of that empire. But the silence of Homer concerning
so mighty a people, and one which must needs have been well
known, renders this fact exceeding doubtful. And it must be
owned, that whatever relates to the times of the ancient
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
history of the Assyrians, is attended with great difficulties,
into which my plan does not permit me to enter.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Pul. A.M. 3233. Ant. J.C. 771.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Pul.</hi>
The Scripture informs us, that Pul, king of Assyria,
being come into the land of Israel, had a thousand
talents of silver given him by Menahem, king of the
ten tribes, to engage him to lend him assistance, and
secure him on his throne.<note place='foot'>2 Kings xv. 19.</note>
</p>

<p>
This Pul is supposed to be the king of Nineveh, who repented,
with all his people, at the preaching of Jonah.
</p>

<p>
He is also thought to be the father of Sardanapalus, the
last king of the Assyrians, called, according to the custom of
the eastern nations, Sardanpul, that is to say, Sardan, the son
of Pul.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sardanapalus.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sardanapalus.</hi>
This prince surpassed all his predecessors
in effeminacy, luxury, and cowardice.<note place='foot'>Diod. l. ii. p. 109-115.
Athen. l. xii. p. 529, 530. Just. l. i. c. 3.</note> He never went
out of his palace, but spent all his time amongst a company
of women, dressed and painted like them, and employed
like them at the distaff. He placed all his happiness and
glory in the possession of immense treasures, in feasting and
rioting, and indulging himself in all the most infamous and
criminal pleasures. He ordered two verses to be put upon his
tomb, which imported, that he carried away with him all that
he had eaten, and all the pleasures he had enjoyed, but left
all the rest behind him.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Hæc habeo quæ edi, quæque exaturata libido</l>
<l>Hausit: at illa jacent multa et præclara relicta.<note place='foot'><p>Κεῖν᾽
ἔχω ὅσσ᾽ ἔφαγον, καὶ ἐφύβρισα, καὶ μετ᾽ ἔρωτος<lb/>
Τέρπν᾽ ἔπαθον; τὰ δὲ πολλὰ καὶ ὄλβια πάντα λέλειπται.
</p>
<p>
Quid aliud, inquit Aristoteles, in bovis, non in regis sepulchro, inscriberes? Hæc
habere se mortuum dicit, quæ ne vivus quidem diutiùs habebat, quàm fruebatur.
Cic. <hi rend='italic'>Tusc. Quæst.</hi> l. v. n. 101.&mdash;Trans.</p></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
An epitaph, says Aristotle, fit for a hog.
</p>

<p>
Arbaces, governor of Media, having found means to get
into the palace, and having with his own eyes seen Sardanapalus
in the midst of his infamous seraglio; enraged at such a
spectacle, and not able to endure that so many brave men
should be subject to a prince more soft and effeminate than
the women themselves, immediately formed a conspiracy
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
against him. Belesis, governor of Babylon, and several others,
entered into it. On the first rumour of this revolt, the king
hid himself in the inmost part of his palace. Being obliged
afterwards to take the field with some forces which he had
assembled, he at first gained three successive victories over
the enemy, but was afterwards overcome, and pursued to the
gates of Nineveh; wherein he shut himself, in hopes the
rebels would never be able to take a city so well fortified, and
stored with provisions for a considerable time: the siege
proved indeed of very great length. It had been declared by
an ancient oracle, that Nineveh could never be taken, unless
the river became an enemy to the city. These words buoyed
up Sardanapalus, because he looked upon the thing as impossible.
But when he saw that the Tigris, by a violent inundation,
had thrown down twenty stadia<note place='foot'>Two miles
and a half.&mdash;Trans.</note> of the city wall, and by
that means opened a passage to the enemy, he understood the
meaning of the oracle, and thought himself lost.<note place='margin'>A.M. 3257.
Ant. J.C. 747.</note> He
resolved, however, to die in such a manner, as, according
to his opinion, should cover the infamy of
his scandalous and effeminate life. He ordered a pile of wood
to be made in his palace, and setting fire to it, burnt himself,
his eunuchs, his women, and his treasures. Athenæus makes
these treasures amount to a thousand myriads of talents of
gold,<note place='foot'>About fourteen hundred millions
sterling.&mdash;Trans.</note> and ten times as many talents of silver, which, without
reckoning any thing else, is a sum that exceeds all credibility.
A myriad contains ten thousand; and one single myriad of
talents of silver is worth thirty millions of French money, or
about one million four hundred thousand pounds sterling. A
man is lost, if he attempts to sum up the whole value; which
induces me to believe, that Athenæus must have very much
exaggerated in his computation; however, we may be assured,
from his account, that the treasures were immensely great.
</p>

<p>
Plutarch, in his second treatise,<note place='foot'>Pag.
335, 336.</note> dedicated to the praise of
Alexander the Great, wherein he examines in what the true
greatness of princes consists, after having shown that it can
arise from nothing but their own personal merit, confirms it
by two very different examples, taken from the history of the
Assyrians, in which we are now engaged. Semiramis and
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
Sardanapalus (says he) both governed the same kingdom;
both had the same people, the same extent of country, the
same revenues, the same forces and number of troops; but
they had not the same dispositions, nor the same views.
Semiramis, raising herself above her sex, built magnificent
cities, equipped fleets, armed legions, subdued neighbouring
nations, penetrated into Arabia and Ethiopia, and carried her
victorious arms to the extremities of Asia, spreading consternation
and terror everywhere. Whereas Sardanapalus, as if
he had entirely renounced his sex, spent all his time in the
heart of his palace, perpetually surrounded with a company of
women, whose dress and even manners he had adopted, applying
himself with them to the spindle and the distaff, neither
understanding nor doing any other thing than spinning, eating
and drinking, and wallowing in all manner of infamous pleasure.
Accordingly, a statue was erected to him, after his
death, which represented him in the posture of a dancer, with
an inscription upon it, in which he addressed himself to the
spectator in these words: <hi rend='italic'>Eat, drink, and be merry; every
thing else is nothing</hi>: an inscription very suitable to the
epitaph he himself had ordered to be put upon his monument.<note place='foot'>Ἔσθις,
πῖνε, ἀφροδισίαζε; τ᾽ ἄλλα δὲ ἐδέν.</note>
</p>

<p>
Plutarch in this place judges of Semiramis, as almost all the
profane historians do of the glory of conquerors. But, if we
would make a true judgment of things, was the unbounded
ambition of that queen much less blamable, than the dissolute
effeminacy of Sardanapalus? Which of the two vices did
most mischief to mankind?
</p>

<p>
We are not to wonder that the Assyrian empire should fall
under such a prince; but undoubtedly it was not till after
having passed through various augmentations, diminutions,
and revolutions, common to all states, even to the greatest,
during the course of several ages. This empire had subsisted
above 1450 years.
</p>

<p>
Of the ruins of this vast empire were formed three considerable
kingdoms; that of the Medes, which Arbaces, the principal
head of the conspiracy, restored to its liberty; that of
the Assyrians of Babylon, which was given to Belesis, governor
of that city; and that of the Assyrians of Nineveh, the first
king whereof took the name of Ninus the younger.
</p>

<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>

<p>
In order to understand the history of the second Assyrian
empire, which is very obscure, and of which little is said by
historians, it is proper, and even absolutely necessary, to compare
what is said of it by profane authors with what we are
informed concerning it by holy Scripture; that by the help of
that double light we may have the clearer idea of the two
empires of Nineveh and Babylon, which for some time were
separate and distinct, and afterwards united and confounded
together. I shall first treat of this second Assyrian empire,
and then return to the kingdom of the Medes.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. The Second Assyrian Empire, both
of Nineveh and Babylon.</head>

<p>
This second Assyrian empire continued two hundred and ten
years, reckoning to the year in which Cyrus, who was become
absolute master of the East by the death of his father Cambyses
and his father-in-law Cyaxares, published the famous
edict, whereby the Jews were permitted to return into their
own country, after a seventy years' captivity at Babylon.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belesis. A.M. 3257. Ant. J.C. 747.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>Kings of Babylon.<note place='foot'>2 Kings xx.
12.</note></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Belesis</hi>. He is the same as
Nabonassar, from whose reign began the famous
astronomical epocha at Babylon, called from his
name the <hi rend='italic'>Æra of Nabonassar</hi>. In the holy Scriptures
he is called Baladan. He reigned but twelve
years, and was succeeded by his son:
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Merodach-Baladan.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Merodach-Baladan.</hi>
This is the prince who sent
ambassadors to king Hezekiah, to congratulate him
on the recovery of his health, of which we shall speak
hereafter.<note place='foot'>Ibid. </note> After
him there reigned several other kings of
Babylon,<note place='foot'>Can. Ptol.</note>
with whose story we are entirely unacquainted. I
shall therefore proceed to the kings of Nineveh.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Tiglath-Pileser. A.M. 3257. Ant. J.C. 747.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>Kings of Nineveh</hi>.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tiglath-Pileser</hi>.
This is the name given by the holy Scripture to the king, who is supposed
to be the first that reigned at Nineveh, after
the destruction of the ancient Assyrian empire. He
is called Thilgamus, by Ælian.<note place='foot'>Lib. xii.
<hi rend='italic'>hist. anim.</hi> c. 21. Castor apud Euseb.
<hi rend='italic'>Chron.</hi> p. 49.</note> He is said to have
taken the name of Ninus the younger, in order to honour and
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
distinguish his reign by the name of so ancient and illustrious
a prince.
</p>

<p>
Ahaz, king of Judah,<note place='foot'>2 Kings xvi. 7,
&amp;c.</note> whose incorrigible impiety could not
be reclaimed, either by the divine favours or chastisements,
finding himself attacked at the same time by the kings of
Syria and Israel, robbed the temple of part of its gold and
silver, and sent it to Tiglath-Pileser, to purchase his assistance;
promising him besides to become his vassal, and to pay him
tribute. The king of Assyria finding so favourable an
opportunity of adding Syria and Palestine to his empire,
readily accepted the proposal. Advancing that way with a
numerous army, he beat Rezin, took Damascus, and put an
end to the kingdom erected there by the Syrians, as God had
foretold by his prophets Isaiah and Amos<note place='foot'>Is. viii. 4.
Am. i. 5.</note>. From thence he
marched against Pekah, and took all that belonged to the
kingdom of Israel beyond Jordan, as well as all Galilee. But
he made Ahaz pay very dear for his protection, still exacting
of him such exorbitant sums of money, that for the payment
of them he was obliged not only to exhaust his own treasures,
but to take all the gold and silver of the temple. Thus this
alliance served only to drain the kingdom of Judah, and to
bring into its neighbourhood the powerful kings of Nineveh;
who afterwards became so many instruments in the hand of
God for the chastisement of his people.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Shalmanezer. A.M. 3276. Ant. J.C. 728.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Shalmanezer</hi>. Sabacus, the Ethiopian, whom the
Scripture calls So, having made himself master of
Egypt, Hoshea, king of Samaria, entered into an
alliance with him, hoping by that means to shake off
the Assyrian yoke.<note place='foot'>2 Kings xvii.</note> To this end he withdrew from
his dependence upon Shalmanezer, refusing to pay him any
further tribute, or make him the usual presents.
</p>

<p>
Shalmanezer, to punish him for his presumption, marched
against him with a powerful army; and after having subdued
all the plain country, shut him up in Samaria, where he kept
him closely besieged for three years; at the end of which he
took the city, loaded Hoshea with chains, and threw him into
prison for the rest of his days; carried away the people
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
captive, and planted them in Halah and Habor, cities of the
Medes. And thus was the kingdom of Israel, or of the ten
tribes, destroyed, as God had often threatened by his prophets.
This kingdom, from the time of its separation from that of
Judah, lasted about two hundred and fifty years.
</p>

<p>
It was at this time that Tobit, with Anna his wife, and his
son Tobias, was carried captive into Assyria, where he became
one of the principal officers of king Shalmanezer.<note place='foot'>Tob. 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
Shalmanezer died, after having reigned fourteen years, and
was succeeded by his son:
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sennacherib. A.M. 3287. Ant. J.C. 717.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sennacherib</hi>. He is also called Sargon in
Scripture.<note place='foot'>Is. xx. 1. 2 Kings xviii. and xix.</note>
</p>

<p>
As soon as this prince was settled on the throne,
he renewed the demand of the tribute exacted by his
father from Hezekiah. Upon his refusal he declared
war against him, and entered into Judea with a mighty army.
Hezekiah, grieved to see his kingdom pillaged, sent ambassadors
to him, to desire peace upon any terms he would prescribe.
Sennacherib, seemingly mollified, entered into treaty with
him, and demanded a very great sum of gold and silver. The holy
king exhausted both the treasures of the temple, and his own
coffers, to pay it. The Assyrian, regarding neither the sanction
of oaths nor treaties, still continued the war, and pushed on
his conquests more vigorously than ever. Nothing was able to
withstand his power, and of all the strong places of Judah,
none remained untaken but Jerusalem, which was likewise
reduced to the utmost extremity. At this very juncture,<note place='foot'>2
Kings xix. 9.</note> Sennacherib was informed, that Tirhakah, king of Ethiopia,
who had joined his forces with those of the king of Egypt,
was coming up to succour the besieged city. Now it was
contrary to the express command of God, as well as the
remonstrances of Isaiah and Hezekiah, that the chief men at
Jerusalem had required any foreign assistance. The Assyrian
prince marched immediately to meet the approaching enemy,
after having written a letter to Hezekiah, full of blasphemy
against the God of Israel, whom he insolently boasted he would
speedily vanquish, as he had done all the gods of the other
nations round about him. In short, he discomfited the Ægyptians,
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
and pursued them even into their own country, which
he ravaged, and returned laden with spoil.
</p>

<p>
It was probably during Sennacherib's absence, which was
pretty long, or at least some little time before, that Hezekiah
fell sick, and was cured in a miraculous manner;<note place='foot'>2
Kings xx. 2 Chron. xxxii. 24-31</note> and that (as
a sign of God's fulfilling the promise he had made him of
curing him so perfectly, that within three days he should be
able to go to the temple,) the shadow of the sun went ten
degrees backwards upon the dial of the palace. Merodach-Baladan,
king of Babylon, being informed of the miraculous
cure of king Hezekiah, sent ambassadors to him with letters
and presents, to congratulate him upon that occasion, and to
acquaint themselves with the miracle that had happened in the
land at this juncture, with respect to the sun's retrogradation
ten degrees. Hezekiah was extremely sensible of the honour
done him by that prince, and very forward to show his ambassadors
the riches and treasures he possessed, and to let them
see the whole magnificence of his palace. Humanly speaking,
there was nothing in this proceeding but what was allowable
and commendable; but in the eyes of the supreme Judge,
which are infinitely more piercing and delicate than ours, this
action discovered a lurking pride, and secret vanity, with which
his righteousness was offended. Accordingly, he instantly
informed the king by his prophet Isaiah, that the riches and
treasures which he had been showing to those ambassadors
with so much ostentation, should one day be transported to
Babylon; and that his children should be carried thither, to
become servants in the palace of that monarch. This was
then utterly improbable; for Babylon, at the time we are
speaking of, was in friendship and alliance with Jerusalem,
as appears by her having sent ambassadors thither: nor did
Jerusalem then seem to have any thing to fear, but from
Nineveh; whose power was at that time formidable, and who
had entirely declared against her. But the fortune of those
two cities was to change, and the word of God was literally
accomplished.
</p>

<p>
But to return to Sennacherib.<note place='foot'>2 Kings
xix. 35-57.</note> After he had ravaged
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
Egypt, and taken a vast number of prisoners, he came back
with his victorious army, encamped before Jerusalem, and
besieged it anew. The city seemed to be inevitably lost: it
was without resource, and without hope from the hands of
men; but had a powerful protector in Heaven, whose jealous
ears had heard the impious blasphemies uttered by the king of
Nineveh against His sacred name. In one single night a
hundred and eighty-five thousand men of his army perished by
the sword of the destroying angel. After so terrible a blow
this pretended king of kings, (for so he called himself,) this
triumpher over nations, and conqueror even of gods, was obliged
to return to his own country with the miserable remnant of his
army, covered with shame and confusion: nor did he survive
his defeat more than a few months, only to make a kind of
open confession of his crime to God, whose supreme majesty
he had presumed to insult, and who now, to use the Scripture
terms, having <q>put a ring into his nose, and a bridle into his
mouth,</q> as a wild beast, made him return in that humbled,
afflicted condition, through those very countries, which a little
before had beheld him so haughty and imperious.
</p>

<p>
Upon his return to Nineveh, being enraged at his disgrace,
he treated his subjects in the most cruel and tyrannical manner.
The effects of his fury fell more heavily upon the Jews and
Israelites, of whom he caused great numbers to be massacred
every day, ordering their bodies to be left exposed in the streets,
and suffering no man to give them burial.<note place='foot'>Tobit
i. 18-24</note> Tobit, to avoid his
cruelty, was obliged to conceal himself for some time, and
suffer all his effects to be confiscated. In short, the king's
savage temper rendered him so insupportable to his own
family, that his two eldest sons conspired against him, and
killed him in the temple,<note place='foot'>2 Kings xix.
37.</note> in the presence of his god Nisroch,
as he lay prostrate before him. But these two princes, being
obliged after this parricide to fly into Armenia, left the kingdom
to Esarhaddon, their youngest brother.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Esarhaddon. A.M. 3294. Ant. J.C. 710.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Esarhaddon</hi>. We have already observed, that after
Merodach-Baladan there was a succession of kings
at Babylon, of whom history has transmitted nothing
but the names.<note place='foot'>Can. Ptol.</note> The royal family becoming extinct,
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
there was an eight years' interregnum, full of troubles and
commotions. Esarhaddon, taking advantage of this juncture,
made himself master of Babylon, and annexing it to his
former dominions, reigned over the two united empires thirteen
years.
</p>

<p>
After having reunited to the Assyrian empire Syria and
Palestine, which had been rent from it in the preceding reign,
he entered the land of Israel, where he took captive as many
as were left there, and carried them into Assyria, except an
inconsiderable number that escaped his pursuit. But that the
country might not become a desert, he sent colonies of idolatrous
people, taken out of the countries beyond the Euphrates, to
dwell in the cities of Samaria. The prediction of Isaiah was
then fulfilled;<note place='foot'>Is. vii. 8.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be
broken, that it be no more a people</hi>. This was exactly the space
of time which elapsed between the prediction and the event:
and the people of Israel did then truly cease to be a visible
nation, what was left of them being altogether mixed and
confounded with other nations.
</p>

<p>
This prince, having possessed himself of the land of Israel,
sent some of his generals with part of his army into Judea, to
reduce that country likewise under his subjection.<note place='foot'>2
Chron. xxxiii. 11, 13.</note> These
generals defeated Manasseh, and having taken him prisoner,
brought him to Esarhaddon, who put him in chains, and
carried him with him to Babylon. But Manasseh, having
afterwards appeased the wrath of God by a sincere and lively
repentance, obtained his liberty, and returned to Jerusalem.
</p>

<p>
Meantime the colonies, that had been sent into Samaria,
in the room of its ancient inhabitants, were grievously infested
with lions.<note place='foot'>2 Kings xvii.
25-41.</note> The king of Babylon being told that the cause of
this calamity was their not worshipping the God of the country,
ordered an Israelitish priest to be sent to them, from among
the captives brought from that country, to teach them the
worship of the God of Israel. But these idolaters did no
more than admit the true God amongst their ancient divinities,
and worshipped him jointly with their false deities. This
corrupt worship continued afterwards, and was the primary
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
source of the aversion entertained by the Jews against the
Samaritans.
</p>

<p>
Esarhaddon, after a prosperous reign of thirty-nine years
over the Assyrians, and thirteen over the Babylonians, was
succeeded by his son:
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Saosduchinus. A.M. 3335. Ant. J.C. 669.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Saosduchinus</hi>. This prince is called in Scripture Nabuchodonosor,
which name was common to the kings
of Babylon. To distinguish this from the others,
he is called Nabuchodonosor the First.
</p>

<p>
Tobit was still alive at this time, and dwelt among other
captives at Nineveh.<note place='foot'>Tobit xiv.
5-13.</note> Perceiving his end approaching, he
foretold to his children the sudden destruction of that city; of
which at that time there was not the least appearance. He
advised them to quit the city, before its ruin came on, and to
depart as soon as they had buried him and his wife.
</p>

<p>
<q>The ruin of Nineveh is at hand,</q> says the good old man,
<q>abide no longer here, for I perceive the wickedness of the
city will occasion its destruction.</q> These last words are
very remarkable, <q>the wickedness of the city will occasion its
destruction.</q> Men will be apt to impute the ruin of Nineveh
to any other reason, but we are taught by the Holy Ghost,
that her unrighteousness was the true cause of it, as it will be
with other states that imitate her crimes.
</p>

<p>
Nabuchodonosor defeated the king of the Medes in a
pitched battle,<note place='foot'>Judith i. 5,
6.</note> fought the twelfth year of his reign, upon the
plain of Ragau, took Ecbatana, the capital of his kingdom,
and returned triumphant to Nineveh. When we come to treat
of the history of the Medes, we shall give a more particular
account of this victory.
</p>

<p>
It was immediately after this expedition, that Bethulia was
besieged by Holofernes, one of Nabuchodonosor's generals;
and that the famous enterprise of Judith was accomplished.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Saracus. A.M. 3356. Ant. J.C. 648.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Saracus</hi>, otherwise called
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Chynaladanus</hi>. This prince
succeeded Saosduchinus;<note place='foot'>Alex. Polyhist.</note>
and having rendered himself contemptible to his subjects, by his effeminacy,
and the little care he took of his dominions, Nabopolassar,
a Babylonian by birth, and general of his army, usurped
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
that part of the Assyrian empire, and reigned over it one and
twenty years.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Nabopolassar. A.M. 3378. Ant. J.C. 626.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Nabopolassar</hi>. This prince, the better to maintain his
usurped sovereignty, made an alliance with Cyaxares,
king of the Medes. With their joint forces they
besieged and took Nineveh, killed Saracus, and
utterly destroyed that great city. We shall speak more largely
of this great event, when we come to the history of the Medes.
From this time forwards the city of Babylon became the only
capital of the Assyrian empire.
</p>

<p>
The Babylonians and the Medes, having destroyed Nineveh,
became so formidable, that they drew upon themselves the
jealousy of all their neighbours. Necho, king of Egypt, was so
alarmed at their power, that to stop their progress he marched
towards the Euphrates at the head of a powerful army, and
made several considerable conquests. See the history of the
Egyptians<note place='foot'>Pag. <ref target="Pg070">70</ref>.</note>
for what relates to this expedition, and the consequences
that attended it.
</p>

<p>
Nabopolassar finding,<note place='foot'>Beros. apud Joseph.
<hi rend='italic'>Antiq.</hi> l. x. c. 11. &amp;
<hi rend='italic'>con. Ap.</hi> l. i.</note> that after the taking of Carchemish
by Necho, all Syria and Palestine had revolted from him, and
neither his age nor infirmities permitting him to go in person
to recover them, he made his son Nabuchodonosor partner
with him in the empire, and sent him with an army to reduce
those countries to their former subjection.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3398. Ant. J.C. 606.</note>
From this time the Jews begin to reckon the years of Nabuchodonosor,
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> from the end of the third year of
Jehoiakim, king of Judah, or rather from the beginning
of the fourth. But the Babylonians compute
the reign of this prince only from the death of his father, which
happened two years later.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Nabuchodonosor II.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Nabuchodonosor II.</hi>
This prince defeated Necho's army, near the Euphrates, and
retook Carchemish.<note place='foot'>Jer. xlvi. 2. 2 Kings xxiv. 7.</note> From
thence he marched towards Syria and Palestine, and
reunited those provinces to his dominions.
</p>

<p>
He likewise entered Judea, besieged Jerusalem, and took
it:<note place='foot'>Dan. i. 1-7. 2 Chron. xxxvi.
6, 7.</note> he caused Jehoiakim to be put in chains, with a design to
have him carried to Babylon; but being moved with his repentance
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
and affliction, he restored him to the throne. Great
numbers of the Jews, and, among the rest, some children of
the royal family, were carried captive to Babylon, whither all
the treasures of the king's palace, and a part of the sacred
vessels of the temple, were likewise transported. Thus was the
judgment which God had denounced by the prophet Isaiah to
king Hezekiah accomplished. From this famous epocha,
which was the fourth year of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, we
are to date the captivity of the Jews at Babylon, so often foretold
by Jeremiah. Daniel, then but twelve years old,<note place='foot'>Some imagine
him to have been eighteen years of age at this time.&mdash;Trans.</note> was
carried captive among the rest; and Ezekiel some time afterwards.
</p>

<p>
Towards the end of the fifth year of Jehoiakim died
Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, after having reigned one and
twenty years.<note place='foot'>Can. Ptol. Beros. apud Joseph.
<hi rend='italic'>Antiq.</hi> l. x. c. 11. &amp;
<hi rend='italic'>con. Ap.</hi> l. x.</note> As soon as his son Nabuchodonosor had news
of his death, he set out with all expedition for Babylon, taking
the nearest way through the desert, attended only with a small
retinue, leaving the bulk of his army with his generals, to be
conducted to Babylon with the captives and spoils. On his
arrival, he received the government from the hands of those
that had carefully preserved it for him, and so succeeded to all
the dominions of his father, which comprehended Chaldea,
Assyria, Arabia, Syria, and Palestine, over which, according to
Ptolemy, he reigned forty-three years.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3401. Ant. J.C. 603.</note>
In the fourth year of his reign he had a dream,<note place='foot'>Dan. ii.</note> at which
he was greatly terrified, though he could not call it
again to mind. He thereupon consulted the wise
men and soothsayers of his kingdom, requiring of
them to make known to him the substance of his dream.
They all answered, that it was beyond the reach of their art to
discover it; and that the utmost they could do, was to give
the interpretation of his dream, when he had made it known to
them. As absolute princes are not accustomed to meet with
opposition, but will be obeyed in all things, Nabuchodonosor,
imagining they dealt insincerely with him, fell into a violent
rage, and condemned them all to die. Now Daniel and his
three companions were included in the sentence, as being
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
ranked among the wise men. But Daniel, having first invoked
his God, desired to be introduced to the king, to whom he
revealed the whole substance of his dream. <q>The thing thou
sawest,</q> says he to him, <q>was an image of an enormous size,
and a terrible countenance. The head thereof was of gold, the
breast and arms of silver, the belly and thighs of brass, and
the feet part of iron and part of clay. And as the king was
attentively looking upon that vision, behold a stone was cut out
of a mountain without hands, and the stone smote the image
upon his feet, and brake them to pieces; the whole image was
ground as small as dust, and the stone became a great mountain,
and filled the whole earth.</q> When Daniel had related
the dream, he gave the king likewise the interpretation thereof,
showing him how it signified the three great empires, which
were to succeed that of the Assyrians, namely, the Persian,
the Grecian, and the Roman, or (according to some,) that of
the successors of Alexander the Great. <q>After these kingdoms
(continued Daniel) shall the God of heaven set up a
kingdom, which shall never be destroyed; and this kingdom
shall not be left to other people, but shall break in pieces and
consume all these kingdoms, and shall stand for ever.</q> By
which Daniel plainly foretold the kingdom of Jesus Christ.
The king, ravished with admiration and astonishment, after
having acknowledged and loudly declared, that the God of the
Israelites was truly the God of gods, advanced Daniel to the
highest offices in the kingdom, made him chief of the governors
over all the wise men, ruler of the whole province of
Babylon, and one of the principal lords of the council, that
always attended the court. His three friends were also
promoted to honours and dignities.
</p>

<p>
At this time Jehoiakim revolted from the king of Babylon,
whose generals, that were still in Judea, marched against him,
and committed all kinds of hostilities upon this country.<note place='foot'>2
Kings xxiv. 1, 2.</note> <q>He
slept with his fathers,</q> is all the Scripture says of his death.
Jeremiah had prophesied, that he should neither be regretted
nor lamented; but should <q>be buried with the burial of an ass,
drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem:</q> this was
no doubt fulfilled, though it is not known in what manner.
</p>

<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>

<p>
Jechonias<note place='foot'>Al. Jehoiakim. 2 Kings xxiv.
6-18.&mdash;Trans.</note> succeeded both to the throne and iniquity of his
father. Nabuchodonosor's lieutenants continuing the blockade
of Jerusalem, in three months' time he himself came at the
head of his army, and made himself master of the city. He
plundered both the temple and the king's palace of all their
treasures, and sent them away to Babylon, together with all
the golden vessels remaining, which Solomon had made for the
use of the temple: he carried away likewise a vast number of
captives, amongst whom was king Jechonias, his mother, his
wives, with all the chief officers and great men of his kingdom.
In the room of Jechonias, he set upon the throne his uncle
Mattaniah, who was otherwise called Zedekiah.
</p>

<p>
This prince had as little religion and prosperity as his forefathers.<note place='foot'>2
Kings xxiv. 17-20. and xxv. 1-10.</note>
Having made an alliance with Pharaoh, king of
Egypt, he broke the oath of fidelity he had taken to the king of
Babylon. The latter soon chastised him for it, and immediately
laid siege to Jerusalem. The king of Egypt's arrival at
the head of an army gave the besieged a gleam of hope; but
their joy was very short-lived; the Egyptians were defeated,
and the conqueror returned against Jerusalem, and renewed
the siege, which lasted near a twelvemonth.<note place='margin'>A.M. 3415. Ant. J.C.
589.</note> At last
the city was taken by storm, and a terrible slaughter
ensued. Zedekiah's two sons were, by Nabuchodonosor's
orders, killed before their father's face, with all the
nobles and principal men of Judah. Zedekiah himself had
both his eyes put out, was loaded with fetters, and carried to
Babylon, where he was confined in prison as long as he lived.
The city and temple were pillaged and burnt, and all their
fortifications demolished.
</p>

<p>
Upon Nabuchodonosor's return to Babylon, after his successful
war against Judea, he ordered a golden statue to be
made,<note place='foot'>Dan. iii.</note> sixty<note place='foot'>Ninety
feet.&mdash;Trans.</note> cubits high, assembled all the great men of the
kingdom to celebrate the dedication of it, and commanded all
his subjects to worship it, threatening to cast those that should
refuse into the midst of a burning fiery furnace. Upon this
occasion it was that the three young Hebrews, Ananias, Misael,
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
and Azarias, who with an invincible courage refused to comply
with the king's impious ordinance, were preserved after a
miraculous manner in the midst of the flames. The king,
himself a witness of this astonishing miracle, published an
edict, whereby all persons whatsoever were forbidden, upon
pain of death, to speak any thing amiss against the God of
Ananias, Misael, and Azarias. He likewise promoted these
three young men to the highest honours and employments.
</p>

<p>
Nabuchodonosor, in the twenty-first year of his reign, and
the fourth after the destruction of Jerusalem, marched again
into Syria, and besieged Tyre, at the time when Ithobal was
king thereof. Tyre was a strong and opulent city, which had
never been subject to any foreign power, and was then in great
repute for its commerce: by which many of its citizens were
become like so many princes in wealth and magnificence.<note place='foot'>Ezek.
xxvi. and xxvii. Is. xxiii. 8. Just. l. xviii. c. 3.</note> It
had been built by the Sidonians two hundred and forty years
before the temple of Jerusalem. For Sidon being taken by
the Philistines of Ascalon, many of its inhabitants made their
escape in ships, and founded the city of Tyre. And for this
reason we find it called in Isaiah <q>the daughter of Sidon.</q><note place='foot'>Is.
xxiii. 12.</note> But the daughter soon surpassed the mother in grandeur,
riches, and power. Accordingly, at the time we are speaking
of, she was in a condition to resist, thirteen years together, a
monarch, to whose yoke all the rest of the East had submitted.
</p>

<p>
It was not till after so long an interval, that Nabuchodonosor
made himself master of Tyre.<note place='foot'>Jos. <hi rend='italic'>Ant.</hi>
l. x. c. 11 &amp; <hi rend='italic'>con. Ap.</hi> l. i.</note> His troops suffered
incredible hardships before it; so that, according to the prophet's
expression, <q>every head was made bald, and every
shoulder was peeled.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. xxix. 18,
19.</note> Before the city was reduced to the last
extremity, its inhabitants retired, with the greatest part of their
effects, into a neighbouring isle, half a mile from the shore,
where they built a new city; the name and glory whereof
extinguished the remembrance of the old one, which from
thenceforward became a mere village, retaining the name of
ancient Tyre.
</p>

<p>
Nabuchodonosor and his army having undergone the utmost
fatigues during so long and difficult a siege,<note place='foot'>Ibid.
18-20.</note> and having found
<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>
nothing in the place to requite them for the service they had
rendered Almighty God (it is the expression of the prophet) in
executing his vengeance upon that city, to make them amends,
God was pleased to promise by the mouth of Ezekiel, that he
would give them the spoils of Egypt. And indeed they soon
after conquered that country, as I have more fully related in
the history of the Egyptians.<note place='foot'>Page <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
When this prince had happily finished all his wars, and was
in a state of perfect peace and tranquillity, he employed himself
in putting the last hand to the building, or rather to the embellishing
of Babylon. The reader may see in
Josephus<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Antiq.</hi> l. x. 11.</note> an
account of the magnificent structures ascribed to this monarch
by several writers. I have mentioned a great part of them in
the description already given of that stately city.
</p>

<p>
Whilst nothing seemed wanting to complete this prince's
happiness, a frightful dream disturbed his repose, and filled
him with great anxiety.<note place='foot'>Dan. iv.</note>
<q>He saw a tree in the midst of the
earth, whose height was great: the tree grew, and was strong,
and the height of it reached unto heaven, and the sight thereof
to the end of the earth. The leaves were fair, and the fruit
much; and in it was meat for all: the beasts of the field had
shadow under it, and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the
boughs thereof; and all flesh was fed of it. Then a watcher
and a holy one came down from heaven, and cried; Hew
down the tree, and cut off his branches, shake off his leaves,
and scatter his fruit; let the beasts get away from under it,
and the fowls from his branches. Nevertheless leave the stump
of his roots in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in
the tender grass of the field; and let it be wet with the dew of
heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts in the grass of
the earth. Let his heart be changed from man's; and let a
beast's heart be given unto him; and let seven times pass over
him. This matter is by the decree of the watchers, and the
demand by the word of the holy ones; to the intent that the
living may know that the Most High ruleth in the kingdom of
men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will, and setteth up over
it the basest of men.</q>
</p>

<p>
The king, justly terrified at this dreadful dream, consulted
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
all his wise men and magicians, but to no purpose. He was
obliged to have recourse to Daniel, who expounded the dream,
and applied it to the king himself, plainly declaring to him,
<q>That he should be driven from the company of men for seven
years, should be reduced to the condition and fellowship of the
beasts of the field, and feed upon grass like an ox; that his
kingdom nevertheless should be preserved for him, and he
should repossess his throne, when he should have learnt to
know and acknowledge, that all power is from above, and
cometh from Heaven. After this he exhorted him to break off
his sins by righteousness, and his iniquities by showing mercy
to the poor.</q>
</p>

<p>
All these things came to pass upon Nabuchodonosor, as the
prophet had foretold. At the end of twelve months, as he was
walking in his palace, and admiring the beauty and magnificence
of his buildings, he said: <q>Is not this great Babylon,
which I have built for the house of the kingdom, by the might
of my power, and for the honour of my majesty?</q> Would a
secret impulse of complacency and vanity in a prince, at the
sight of such noble structures erected by himself, appear to us
so very criminal? And yet, hardly were the words out of his
mouth, when a voice came down from Heaven, and pronounced
his sentence: <q>In the same hour his understanding went from
him; he was driven from men, and did eat grass like oxen, and
his body was wet with the dew of Heaven, till his hairs were
grown like eagles' feathers, and his nails like birds' claws.</q>
</p>

<p>
After the expiration of the appointed time, he recovered his
senses, and the use of his understanding: <q>He lifted up his
eyes unto Heaven (says the Scripture) and blessed the Most
High; he praised and honoured him that liveth for ever, whose
dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from
generation to generation:</q> Confessing, <q>That all the inhabitants
of the earth are as nothing before him, and that he doeth
according to his will, in the army of heaven, and among the
inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand, or say
unto him, What doest thou?</q> Now he recovered his former
countenance and form. His courtiers went out to seek him; he
was restored to his throne, and became greater and more powerful
than ever. Penetrated with the heartiest gratitude, he
<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
caused, by a solemn edict, to be published through the whole
extent of his dominions, what astonishing and miraculous things
God had wrought in his person.
</p>

<p>
One year after this he died, having reigned forty-three years,
reckoning from the death of his father. He was one of the
greatest monarchs that ever reigned in the East. He was
succeeded by his son:
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Evil-Merodach. A.M. 3441. Ant. J.C. 563.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Evil-Merodach</hi>.
As soon as he was settled in the throne,
he released Jechonias, king of Judah, out of prison,
where he had been confined near seven and thirty
years.<note place='foot'>2 Kings xxv. 27-30.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the reign of this Evil-Merodach, which lasted but two
years, the learned place Daniel's detection of the fraud practised
by the priests of Bel; the innocent artifice by which he
contrived to destroy the dragon, which was worshipped as a
god; and the miraculous deliverance of the same prophet out
of the den of lions, where he had victuals brought him by the
prophet Habakkuk.
</p>

<p>
Evil-Merodach rendered himself so odious by his debauchery
and other extravagancies, that his own relations conspired
against him, and put him to death.<note place='foot'>Beros. Megasthen.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Neriglissor. A.M. 3444. Ant. J.C. 560.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Neriglissor</hi>, his sister's husband, and one of the chief
conspirators, reigned in his stead.
</p>

<p>
Immediately on his accession to the crown, he
made great preparations for war against the Medes,<note place='foot'>Cyrop.
l. i.</note> which made Cyaxares send for Cyrus out of Persia, to his
assistance. This story will be more particularly related by and
by, where we shall find that this prince was slain in battle in
the fourth year of his reign.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Laborosoarchod. A.M. 3448. Ant. J.C. 556.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Laborosoarchod</hi>, his son, succeeded to the throne.
This was a very wicked prince. Being born with the
most vicious inclinations, he indulged them without
restraint when he came to the crown; as if he had
been invested with sovereign power, only to have the
privilege of committing with impunity the most infamous and
barbarous actions. He reigned but nine months; his own
subjects conspiring against him, put him to death. His successor
was:
</p>

<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Labynitus, or Nabonidus. A.M. 3449. Ant. J.C. 555.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Labynitus, or Nabonidus.</hi> This prince had likewise other
names, and in Scripture that of Belshazzar. It is
on good grounds supposed that he was the son of
Evil-Merodach, by his wife Nitocris, and consequently
grandson to Nabuchodonosor, to whom,
according to Jeremiah's prophecy, the nations of the East
were to be subject, as also to his son, and his grandson after
him: <q>All nations shall serve him, and his son, and his son's
son, until the very time of his land shall come.</q><note place='foot'>Jer.
xxvii. 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
Nitocris is that queen who raised so many noble edifices in
Babylon.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. i. c. 185,
&amp;c.</note> She caused her own monument to be placed over
one of the most remarkable gates of the city, with an inscription,
dissuading her successors from touching the treasures laid
up in it, without the most urgent and indispensable necessity.
The tomb remained closed till the reign of Darius, who, upon
his breaking it open, instead of those immense treasures he had
flattered himself with discovering, found nothing but the
following inscription:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>if thou hadst not an insatiable thirst after money,
and a most sordid, avaricious soul, thou wouldst never
have broken open the monuments of the dead.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
In the first year of Belshazzar's reign, Daniel had the
vision of the four beasts, which represented the four great
monarchies, and the kingdom of the Messiah, which was to
succeed them.<note place='foot'>Dan. vii.</note>
In the third year of the same reign he had
the vision of the ram and the he-goat, which prefigured the
destruction of the Persian empire by Alexander the Great, and
the persecution which Antiochus Epiphanes, king of Syria,
should bring upon the Jews.<note place='foot'>Ibid. viii.</note>
I shall hereafter make some
reflections upon these prophecies, and give a larger account of
them.
</p>

<p>
Belshazzar, whilst his enemies were besieging Babylon,
gave a great entertainment to his whole court, upon a certain
festival, which was annually celebrated with great rejoicing.<note place='foot'>Ibid.
v.</note> The joy of this feast was greatly disturbed by a vision, and still
more so by the explication which Daniel gave of it to the
king. The sentence written upon the wall imported, that his
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
kingdom was taken from him, and given to the Medes and
Persians. That very night the city was taken, and Belshazzar
killed.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3468. Ant. J.C. 536.</note>
Thus ended the Babylonian empire, after having
subsisted two hundred and ten years from the destruction
of the great Assyrian empire.
</p>

<p>
The particular circumstances of the siege, and the taking of
Babylon, shall be related in the history of Cyrus.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. The History of the Kingdom of the Medes.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3257. Ant. J.C. 747.</note>
I took notice, in speaking of the destruction of the ancient
Assyrian empire, that Arbaces, general of the Median
army, was one of the chief authors of the conspiracy
against Sardanapalus: and several writers believe,
that he then immediately became sovereign master of Media
and many other provinces, and assumed the title of king.
Herodotus is not of this opinion. I shall relate what that
celebrated historian says upon the subject.
</p>

<p>
The Assyrians, who had for many ages held the empire of
Asia, began to decline in their power by the revolt of several
nations.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. i. c. 95.</note>
The Medes first threw off their yoke, and maintained
for some time the liberty they had acquired by their valour:
but that liberty degenerating into licentiousness, and their
government not being well established, they fell into a kind of
anarchy, worse than their former subjection. Injustice, violence,
and rapine, prevailed everywhere, because there was
nobody that had either power enough to restrain them, or
sufficient authority to punish the offenders. But all these
disorders at length induced the people to settle a form of
government, which rendered the state more flourishing than
ever it was before.
</p>

<p>
The nation of the Medes was then divided into six tribes.
Almost all the people dwelt in villages, when Dejoces, the son
of Phraortes, a Mede by birth, erected the state into a monarchy.
This person, seeing the great disorders that prevailed
throughout all Media, resolved to take advantage of those
troubles, and make them serve to exalt him to the royal dignity.
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
He had a great reputation in his own country, and passed for
a man, not only regular in his own conduct, but possessed of
all the prudence and equity necessary to govern others.
</p>

<p>
As soon as he had formed the design of obtaining the throne,
he laboured to make the good qualities that had been observed
in him more conspicuous than ever: he succeeded so well,
that the inhabitants of the village where he lived made him
their judge. In this office he acquitted himself with great
prudence; and his cares had all the success that had been
expected from them; for he brought the people of that village
to a sober and regular life. The inhabitants of other villages,
whom perpetual disorders suffered not to live in quiet, observing
the good order Dejoces had introduced in the place where he
presided as judge, began to apply to him, and make him arbitrator
of their differences. The fame of his equity daily
increasing, all such as had any affair of consequence, brought
it before him, expecting to find that equity in Dejoces, which
they could meet with nowhere else.
</p>

<p>
When he found himself thus far advanced in his designs, he
judged it a proper time to set his last engines to work for the
compassing his point. He, therefore, retired from business,
pretending to be over-fatigued with the multitude of people
that resorted to him from all quarters; and would not exercise
the office of judge any longer, notwithstanding all the importunity
of such as wished well to the public tranquillity. Whenever
any persons addressed themselves to him, he told them, that
his own domestic affairs would not allow him to attend to those
of other people.
</p>

<p>
The licentiousness which had been for some time restrained
by the judicious management of Dejoces, began to prevail more
than ever, as soon as he had withdrawn himself from the administration
of affairs; and the evil increased to such a degree,
that the Medes were obliged to assemble, and deliberate upon
the means of putting a stop to the public disorder.
</p>

<p>
There are different sorts of ambition: some violent and
impetuous, carrying every thing as it were by storm, hesitating
at no kind of cruelty or murder: another sort, more gentle,
like that we are speaking of, puts on an appearance of moderation
and justice, working under ground, (if I may use that
<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
expression,) and yet arrives at her point as surely as the
other.
</p>

<p>
Dejoces, who saw things succeeding according to his wish,
sent his emissaries to the assembly, after having instructed
them in the part they were to act. When expedients for
stopping the course of the public evils came to be proposed,
these emissaries, speaking in their turn, represented, that unless
the face of the republic was entirely changed, their country
would become uninhabitable; that the only means to remedy
the present disorders was to elect a king, who should have
authority to restrain violence, and make laws for the government
of the nation. Then every man could prosecute his own
affairs in peace and safety; whereas the injustice that now
reigned in all parts, would quickly force the people to abandon
the country. This opinion was generally approved; and the
whole company was convinced, that no expedient could be
devised more effectual for curing the present evil, than that of
converting the state into a monarchy. The only thing then to
be done, was to choose a king; and about this their deliberations
were not long. They all agreed there was not a man
in Media so capable of governing as Dejoces; so that he was
immediately with common consent elected king.
</p>

<p>
If we reflect in the least on the first establishment of kingdoms,
in any age or country whatsoever, we shall find, that the
maintenance of order, and the care of the public good, was the
original design of monarchy. Indeed there would be no possibility
of establishing order and peace, if all men were resolved
to be independent, and would not submit to an authority which
takes from them a part of their liberty, in order to preserve the
rest. Mankind must be perpetually at war, if they will always
be striving for dominion over others, or refuse to submit to the
strongest. For the sake of their own peace and safety, they
must have a master, and must consent to obey him. This is
the human origin of government. And the Scripture teacheth
us, that the Divine Providence has not only allowed of the
project, and the execution of it, but consecrated it likewise by
an immediate communication of his own power.<note place='foot'>Rom.
xiii. 1, 2.</note>
</p>

<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>

<p>
There is nothing certainly nobler or greater than to see a
private person, eminent for his merit and virtue, and fitted by
his excellent talents for the highest employments, and yet
through inclination and modesty preferring a life of obscurity
and retirement: than to see such a man sincerely refuse the
offer made to him, of reigning over a whole nation, and at last
consent to undergo the toil of government, from no other
motive than that of being serviceable to his fellow-citizens.
His first disposition, by which he declares that he is acquainted
with the duties, and consequently with the dangers annexed to
a sovereign power, shows him to have a soul more elevated and
great than greatness itself; or, to speak more justly, a soul
superior to all ambition: nothing can show him so perfectly
worthy of that important charge, as the opinion he has of his
not being so, and his fears of being unequal to it. But when
he generously sacrifices his own quiet and satisfaction to the
welfare and tranquillity of the public, it is plain he understands
what that sovereign power has in it really good, or truly valuable;
which is, that it puts a man in a condition of becoming the
defender of his country, of procuring it many advantages, and
of redressing various evils; of causing law and justice to
flourish, of bringing virtue and probity into reputation, and of
establishing peace and plenty: and he comforts himself for the
cares and troubles to which he is exposed, by the prospect of
the many benefits resulting from them to the public. Such a
governor was Numa, at Rome; and such have been some
other emperors, whom the people found it necessary to compel
to accept the supreme power.
</p>

<p>
It must be owned (I cannot help repeating it) that there is
nothing nobler or greater than such a disposition. But to put
on the mask of modesty and virtue, in order to satisfy one's
ambition, as Dejoces did; to affect to appear outwardly what
a man is not inwardly; to refuse for a time, and then accept
with a seeming repugnancy, what a man earnestly desires, and
what he has been labouring by secret, underhand practices to
obtain; this double-dealing has so much meanness in it, that
it necessarily lessens our opinion of the person, and extremely
sullies the lustre of those good qualities, which in other
respects, he possesses.
</p>

<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dejoces. A.M. 3294. Ant. J.C. 710.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dejoces</hi> reigned fifty-three years.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. i. c. 96-101.</note> When he had ascended
the throne, he endeavoured to convince the people,
that they were not mistaken in the choice they had
made of him, for restoring of order. At first he
resolved to have his dignity of king attended with all
the marks that could inspire an awe and respect for his person.
He obliged his subjects to build him a magnificent palace in
the place he appointed. This palace he strongly fortified, and
chose out from among his people such persons as he judged
fittest to be his guards, from their attachment to his interests,
and his reliance on their fidelity.
</p>

<p>
After having thus provided for his own security, he applied
himself to polish and civilize his subjects, who, having been
accustomed to live in the country and in villages, almost
without laws and without polity, had contracted the disposition
and manners of savages. To this end he commanded them
to build a city, marking out himself the place and circumference
of the walls. This city was compassed about with seven
distinct walls, all disposed in such a manner, that the outermost
did not hinder the parapet of the second from being seen,
nor the second that of the third, and so of all the rest. The
situation of the place was extremely favourable for such a
design, for it was a regular hill, whose ascent was equal on
every side. Within the last and smallest enclosure stood the
king's palace, with all his treasures: in the sixth, which was
next to that, there were several apartments for lodging the
officers of his household; and the intermediate spaces,
between the other walls, were appointed for the habitation of
the people: the first and largest enclosure was about the
bigness of Athens. The name of this city was Ecbatana.
</p>

<p>
The prospect of it was magnificent and beautiful; for,
besides the disposition of the walls, which formed a kind of
amphitheatre, the different colours wherewith the several
parapets were painted formed a delightful variety.
</p>

<p>
After the city was finished, and Dejoces had obliged part of
the Medes to settle in it, he turned all his thoughts to composing
of laws for the good of the state. But being persuaded,
that the majesty of kings is most respected afar
off<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>major ex
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
longinquo reverentia</foreign>, Tacit.</note> he began to keep himself at a
distance from his people; was almost inaccessible, and, as it
were, invisible to his subjects, not suffering them to speak, or
communicate their affairs to him, but only by petitions, and
the interposition of his officers. And even those that had the
privilege of approaching him, might neither laugh nor spit in
his presence.
</p>

<p>
This able statesman acted in this manner, in order the
better to secure to himself the possession of the crown. For,
having to deal with men yet uncivilized, and no very good
judges of true merit, he was afraid, that too great a familiarity
with him might induce contempt, and occasion plots and
conspiracies against a growing power, which is generally
looked upon with invidious and discontented eyes. But by
keeping himself thus concealed from the eyes of the people,
and making himself known only by the wise laws he made,
and the strict justice he took care to administer to every one,
he acquired the respect and esteem of all his subjects.
</p>

<p>
It is said, that from the innermost part of his palace he saw
every thing that was done in his dominions, by means of his
emissaries, who brought him accounts, and informed him of
all transactions. By this means no crime escaped either the
knowledge of the prince, or the rigour of the law; and the
punishment treading upon the heels of the offence, kept
the wicked in awe, and stopped the course of violence and
injustice.
</p>

<p>
Things might possibly pass in this manner to a certain
degree during his administration: but there is nothing more
obvious than the great inconveniencies necessarily resulting
from the custom introduced by Dejoces, and wherein he has
been imitated by the rest of the Eastern potentates; the
custom, I mean, of living concealed in his palace, of governing
by spies dispersed throughout his kingdom, of relying solely
upon their sincerity for the truth of facts; of not suffering
truth, the complaints of the oppressed, and the just reasons of
innocent persons, to be conveyed to him any other way, than
through foreign channels, that is, by men liable to be prejudiced
or corrupted; men that stopped up all avenues to
remonstrances, or the reparation of injuries, and that were
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
capable of doing the greatest injustice themselves, with so
much the more ease and assurance, as their iniquity remained
undiscovered, and consequently unpunished. But besides all
this, methinks, that very affectation in princes of making themselves
invisible, shows them to be conscious of their slender
merit, which shuns the light, and dares not stand the test of a
near examination.
</p>

<p>
Dejoces was so wholly taken up in humanizing and softening
the manners, and in making laws for the good government
of his people, that he never engaged in any enterprise against
his neighbours, though his reign was very long, for he did not
die till after having reigned fifty-three years.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Pharaortes. A.M. 3347. Ant. J.C. 657.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Phraortes</hi> reigned twenty-two years.<note place='foot'>Herod. c.
102.</note> After the death of Dejoces, his son Phraortes, called otherwise
Aphraartes,<note place='foot'>He is called so by Eusebius,
<hi rend='italic'>Chron. Græc</hi> and by Geor. Syncel.&mdash;Trans.</note>
succeeded. The affinity between these two names would alone make one believe that this is
the king called in Scripture Arphaxad: but that
opinion has many other substantial reasons to support it, as
may be seen in father Montfaucon's learned dissertation, of
which I have here made great use. The passage in Judith,
<hi rend='italic'>That Arphaxad built a very strong city, and called it
Ecbatana,</hi><note place='foot'>Judith, i. 1.</note>
has deceived most authors, and made them believe,
that Arphaxad must be Dejoces, who was certainly the founder
of that city. But the Greek text of Judith, which the Vulgate
translation renders <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ædificavit</foreign>,
says only, <hi rend='italic'>That Arphaxad
added new buildings to Ecbatana</hi>.<note place='foot'>Ἐπωκοδόμησε ἐπὶ Ἐκβατάνοις.
Judith, text Gr.</note> And what can be more
natural, than that, the father not having entirely perfected so
considerable a work, the son should put the last hand to it,
and make such additions as were wanting?
</p>

<p>
Phraortes, being of a very warlike temper, and not contented
with the kingdom of Media, left him by his father, attacked
the Persians;<note place='foot'>Herod. l. i. c. 102.</note>
and defeating them in a decisive battle, brought
them under subjection to his empire. Then strengthened by
the accession of their troops, he attacked other neighbouring
nations, one after another, till he made himself master of
almost all the Upper Asia, which comprehends all that lies
north of mount Taurus, from Media as far as the river Halys.
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
Elate with this good success, he ventured to turn his arms
against the Assyrians, at that time indeed weakened through
the revolt of several nations, but yet very powerful in themselves.
Nabuchodonosor, their king, otherwise called Saosduchinus,
raised a great army in his own country, and sent
ambassadors to several other nations of the East,<note place='foot'>The
Greek text places these embassies before the battle.&mdash;Trans.</note> to require
their assistance. They all refused him with contempt, and
ignominiously treated his ambassadors, letting him see, that
they no longer dreaded that empire, which had formerly kept
the greatest part of them in a slavish subjection.
</p>

<p>
The king, highly enraged at such insolent treatment, swore
by his throne and his reign, that he would be revenged of all
those nations, and put them every one to the sword. He then
prepared for battle, with what forces he had, in the plain of
Ragau. A great battle ensued there, which proved fatal to
Phraortes. He was defeated, his cavalry fled, his chariots
were overturned and put into disorder, and Nabuchodonosor
gained a complete victory. Then taking advantage of the
defeat and confusion of the Medes, he entered their country,
took their cities, pushed on his conquests even to Ecbatana,
forced the towers and the walls by storm, and gave the city to
be pillaged by his soldiers, who plundered it, and stripped it of
all its ornaments.
</p>

<p>
The unfortunate Phraortes, who had escaped into the
mountains of Ragau, fell at last into the hands of Nabuchodonosor,
who cruelly caused him to be shot to death with darts.
After that, he returned to Nineveh with all his army, which
was still very numerous, and for four months together did
nothing but feast and divert himself with those that had
accompanied him in this expedition.
</p>

<p>
In Judith, we read that the king of Assyria sent Holophernes
with a powerful army, to revenge himself of those that had
refused him succours; the progress and cruelty of that commander,
the general consternation of all the people, the
courageous resolution of the Israelites to withstand him, in
assurance that their God would defend them, the extremity
to which Bethulia and the whole nation was reduced, the
miraculous deliverance of that city by the courage and conduct
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
of the brave Judith, and the complete overthrow of the
Assyrian army, are all related in the same book.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Cyaxares I. A.M. 3869. Ant. J.C. 635.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cyaxares I.</hi> reigned forty years.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. i. c. 103-106.</note> This prince succeeded
to the throne immediately after his father's death. He
was a very brave, enterprising prince, and knew how
to make his advantage of the late overthrow of the
Assyrian army. He first settled himself well in his
kingdom of Media, and then conquered all Upper Asia.
But what he had most at heart was, to go and attack Nineveh,
to revenge the death of his father by the destruction of that
great city.
</p>

<p>
The Assyrians came out to meet him, having only the
remains of that great army, which was destroyed before Bethulia.
A battle ensued, wherein the Assyrians were defeated,
and driven back to Nineveh. Cyaxares, pursuing his victory,
laid siege to the city, which was upon the point of falling
inevitably into his hands, but the time was not yet come when
God designed to punish that city for her crimes, and for the
calamities she had brought upon his people, as well as other
nations. It was delivered from its present danger in the
following manner.
</p>

<p>
A formidable army of Scythians, from the neighbourhood of
the Palus Mæotis, had driven the Cimmerians out of Europe,
and was still marching under the conduct of king Madyes in
pursuit of them. The Cimmerians had found means to escape
from the Scythians, who had advanced as far as Media.
Cyaxares, hearing of this irruption, raised the siege from
before Nineveh, and marched with all his forces against that
mighty army, which, like an impetuous torrent, was going to
overrun all Asia. The two armies engaged, and the Medes
were vanquished. The Barbarians, finding no other obstacle
in their way, overspread not only Media, but almost all Asia.
After that, they marched towards Egypt, from whence Psammiticus
diverted their course by presents. They then returned
into Palestine, where some of them plundered the temple of
Venus at Ascalon, the most ancient of the temples dedicated
to that goddess. Some of the Scythians settled at Bethshan,
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
a city in the tribe of Manasseh, on this side Jordan, which
from them was afterwards called Scythopolis.
</p>

<p>
The Scythians for the space of twenty-eight years were
masters of the Upper Asia, namely, the two Armenias, Cappadocia,
Pontus, Colchis, and Iberia; during which time they
spread desolation wherever they came. The Medes had no
way of getting rid of them, but by a dangerous stratagem.
Under pretence of cultivating and strengthening the alliance
they had made together, they invited the greatest part of them
to a general feast, which was made in every family. Each
master of the feast made his guests drunk, and in that condition
were the Scythians massacred. The Medes then repossessed
themselves of the provinces they had lost, and once
more extended their empire to the banks of the Halys, which
was their ancient boundary westward.
</p>

<p>
The remaining Scythians, who were not at this feast,
having heard of the massacre of their countrymen, fled into
Lydia to king Halyattes, who received them with great humanity.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. i. c. 74.</note> This occasioned a war between the two princes.
Cyaxares immediately led his troops to the frontiers of Lydia.
Many battles were fought during the space of five years, with
almost equal advantage on both sides. But the battle fought
in the sixth year was very remarkable on account of an eclipse
of the sun, which happened during the engagement, when on
a sudden the day was turned into a dark night. Thales, the
Milesian, had foretold this eclipse. The Medes and Lydians,
who were then in the heat of the battle, equally terrified with
this unforeseen event, which they looked upon as a sign of the
anger of the gods, immediately retreated on both sides, and
made peace. Syennesis, king of Cilicia, and Nabuchodonosor,<note place='foot'>In
Herodotus he is called Labynetus.&mdash;Trans.</note>
king of Babylon, were the mediators. To render it
more firm and inviolable, the two princes were willing to
strengthen it by the tie of marriage, and agreed, that Halyattes
should give his daughter Aryenis to Astyages, eldest son of
Cyaxares.
</p>

<p>
The manner these people had of contracting an alliance
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
with one another, is very remarkable. Besides other ceremonies,
which they had in common with the Greeks, they had
this in particular; the two contracting parties made incisions
in their own arms, and licked one another's blood.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 3378. Ant. J.C. 626.</note>
Cyaxares's first care, as soon as he found himself again
in peace, was to resume the siege of Nineveh, which
the irruption of the Scythians had obliged him to
raise.<note place='foot'>Herod. l. i. c.
106.</note> Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, with whom
he had lately contracted a particular alliance, joined with him
in a league against the Assyrians. Having therefore united
their forces, they besieged Nineveh, took it, killed Saracus
the king, and utterly destroyed that mighty city.
</p>

<p>
God had foretold by his prophets above a hundred years
before, that he would bring vengeance upon that impious city
for the blood of his servants, wherewith the kings thereof had
gorged themselves, like ravenous lions; that he himself would
march at the head of the troops that should come to besiege it;
that he would cause consternation and terror to go before
them; that he would deliver the old men, the mothers, and
their children, into the merciless hands of the soldiers; that all
the treasures of the city should fall into the hands of rapacious
and insatiable plunderers; and that the city itself should be so
totally and utterly destroyed, that not so much as a vestige of
it should be left; and that the people should ask hereafter,
Where did the proud city of Nineveh stand?
</p>

<p>
But let us hear the language of the prophets themselves:
Woe unto the bloody city, (cries Nahum,) it is all full of lies
and robbery:<note place='foot'>Nahum iii. 1.</note>
he that dasheth in pieces is come up before
thy face.<note place='foot'>ii. 1, 2.</note>
The Lord cometh to avenge the cruelties done to
Jacob and to Israel. I hear already the noise of the whip,
and the noise of the rattling of the wheels, and of the prancing
horses, and of the bounding chariots.<note place='foot'>iii.
2, 3.</note> The horseman lifteth
up both the bright sword, and the glittering spear. The
shield of his mighty men is made red; the valiant men are in
scarlet.<note place='foot'>ii. 3, 4.</note>
They shall seem like torches, they shall run like the
lightning. God is jealous; the Lord revengeth, and is
furious.<note place='foot'>i. 2, 5, 6.</note>
The mountains quake at him, and the hills melt,
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
and the earth is burnt at his presence: who can stand before
his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of his
anger? Behold, I am against thee, saith the Lord of hosts:
I will strip thee of all thy ornaments.<note place='foot'>Nahum,
iii. 5.</note> Take ye the spoil of
silver, take the spoil of gold; for there is no end of the store
and glory out of all the pleasant furniture.<note place='foot'>ii.
9, 10.</note> She is empty, and
void, and waste. Nineveh is destroyed; she is overthrown;
she is desolate. The gates of the rivers shall be opened, and
the palace<note place='foot'>The author in this place renders it,
Her temple is destroyed to the foundations. But I have chosen to
follow our English Bible, though in the Latin it is
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>camplum</foreign>.&mdash;Trans.</note>
shall be dissolved.<note place='foot'>ii. 6.</note> And Huzzab shall be led
away captive; she shall be brought up, and her maids shall
lead her as with the voice of doves tabring upon their breasts.
I see a multitude of slain, and a great number of carcasses;
and there is no end of their corpses; they stumble upon their
corpses.<note place='foot'>iii. 3.</note> Where is the dwelling of the lions, and the
feeding places of the young lions, where the lion, even the old
lion, walked, and the lion's whelp, and none made them afraid:
where the lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and
strangled for his lionesses, and filled his holes with prey, and
his dens with rapine:<note place='foot'>ii. 11, 12.</note><note place='foot'>This
is a noble image of the cruel avarice of the Assyrian kings, who pillaged
and plundered all their neighbouring nations, especially Judea, and carried away the
spoils of them to Nineveh.&mdash;Trans.</note> The Lord shall destroy
Assur.<note place='foot'>Zephan. ii. 13-15.</note> He
shall depopulate that city, which was so beautiful, and turn it
into a land where no man cometh, and into a desert. It shall
be a dwelling place for wild beasts, and the birds of night shall
lurk therein. Behold, shall it be said, see that proud city,
which was so stately, and so exalted; which said in her heart,
I am the only city, and besides me there is no other. All they
that pass by her shall scoff at her, and shall insult her with
hissings and contemptuous gestures.
</p>

<p>
The two armies enriched themselves with the spoils of
Nineveh; and Cyaxares, prosecuting his victories, made himself
master of all the cities of the kingdom of Assyria, except
Babylon and Chaldea, which belonged to Nabopolassar.
</p>

<p>
After this expedition Cyaxares died, and left his dominions
to his son Astyages.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Astyages</hi> reigned thirty-five years. This prince is called in
<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
<note place='margin'>Astyages. A.M. 3409. Ant. J.C. 595.</note>
Scripture Ahasuerus. Though his reign was very
long, no less than thirty-five years, yet have we no
particulars recorded of it in history. He had two
children, whose names are famous, namely, Cyaxares, by his
wife Aryenis, and Mandane, by a former marriage. In his
father's lifetime he married Mandane to Cambyses, the son of
Achemenes, king of Persia: from this marriage sprung Cyrus,
who was born but one year after the birth of his uncle
Cyaxares. The latter succeeded his father in the kingdom of
the Medes.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cyaxares II.</hi> This is the prince whom the Scripture calls
Darius the Mede.
</p>

<p>
Cyrus, having taken Babylon, in conjunction with his uncle
Cyaxares, left it under his government. After the death of his
uncle, and his father Cambyses, he united the kingdom of the
Medes and the Persians into one: in the sequel, therefore,
they will be considered only as one empire. I shall begin the
history of that empire with the reign of Cyrus; which will
include also what is known of the reigns of his two predecessors,
Cyaxares and Astyages. But I shall previously give some
account of the kingdom of Lydia, because Crœsus, its king,
has a considerable share in the events of which I am to speak.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. The History of the Lydians.</head>

<p>
The kings who first reigned over the Lydians, are by
Herodotus called Atyadæ, that is, descendants from Atys.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. i. c. 7-13.</note> These, he tells us, derived their origin from Lydus, the son of
Atys; and Lydus gave the name of Lydians to that people,
who before this time were called Mœonians.
</p>

<p>
These Atyadæ were succeeded by the Heraclidæ, or descendants
of Hercules, who possessed this kingdom for the space of
five hundred and five years.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A.M. 2781. Ant. J.C. 1223.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Argo</hi>, great grandson of Alcæus, son of Hercules,
was the first of the Heraclidæ who reigned in Lydia.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Candaules.</note>
The last was <hi rend='smallcaps'>Candaules.</hi> This prince was married to a lady
of exquisite beauty; and, being infatuated by his
passion for her, was perpetually boasting of her charms
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
to others. Nothing would serve him, but that Gyges, one of his
chief officers, should see, and judge of them by his own eyes;
as if the husband's own knowledge of them was not sufficient
for his happiness, or the beauty of his wife would have been
impaired by his silence.<note place='foot'>Non contentus
voluptatum suarum tacitâ conscientiâ&mdash;proisus quasi silentium
damnum pulchritudinis esset. Justin, l. i. c. 7.&mdash;Trans.</note>
The king to this end placed Gyges
secretly in a convenient place; but notwithstanding that precaution,
the queen perceived him when he retired, yet took no
manner of notice of it. Judging, as the historian represents it,
that the most valuable treasure of a woman is her modesty,
she studied a signal revenge for the injury she had received;
and, to punish the fault of her husband, committed a still
greater crime. Possibly, a secret passion for Gyges had as
great a share in that action, as her resentment for the dishonour
done her. Be that as it will, she sent for Gyges, and
obliged him to expiate his crime, either by his own death, or
the king's, at his own option. After some remonstrances to
no purpose, he resolved upon the latter, and by the murder of
Candaules became master of his queen and his
throne.<note place='margin'>A.M. 3286. Ant. J.C. 718.</note>
By this means the kingdom passed from the
family of the Heraclidæ into that of the Mermnadæ.
</p>

<p>
Archilochus, the poet, lived at this time, and, as Herodotus
informs us, spoke of this adventure of Gyges in his poems.
</p>

<p>
I cannot forbear mentioning in this place what is related by
Herodotus, that amongst the Lydians, and almost all other
Barbarians, it was reckoned shameful and infamous even for a
man to appear naked. These footsteps of modesty, which are
met with amongst pagans, ought to be reckoned valuable.<note place='foot'><p>Nostro
quidem more cum parentibus puberes filii, cum soceris generi, non
lavantur. Retinenda est igitur hujus generis verecundia, præsertim naturâ ipsâ
magistrâ et duce. Cic. l. i. <hi rend='italic'>de offic.</hi> n. 129.
</p>
<p>
Nadare se nefas esse credebatur. Val. Max. l. ii. c. 1.&mdash;Trans.</p></note>
We are assured, that among the Romans, a son, who was come
to the age of maturity, never went into the baths with his
father, nor even a son-in-law with his father-in-law; and this
modesty and decency were looked upon by them as enjoined
by the law of nature, the violation whereof was criminal. It is
astonishing, that amongst us our magistrates take no care to
prevent this disorder, which, in the midst of Paris, at the season
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
of bathing, is openly committed with impunity; a disorder so
visibly contrary to the rules of common decency, so dangerous
to young persons of both sexes, and so severely condemned by
paganism itself.
</p>

<p>
Plato relates the story of Gyges in a different manner from
Herodotus.<note place='foot'>Plato <hi rend='italic'>de
Rep.</hi> l. ii. p. 359.</note> He tells us that Gyges wore a ring, the stone of
which, when turned towards him, rendered him invisible; so
that he had the advantage of seeing others, without being seen
himself; and that by means of this ring, with the concurrence
of the queen, he deprived Candaules of his life and throne.
This probably signifies, that in order to compass his criminal
design, he used all the tricks and stratagems, which the world
calls subtle and refined policy, which penetrates into the most
secret purposes of others, without making the least discovery
of its own. The story, thus explained, carries in it a greater
appearance of truth, than what we read in Herodotus.
</p>

<p>
Cicero, after having related this fable of Gyges's famous ring,
adds, that if a wise man had such a ring, he would not use
it to any wicked purpose; because virtue considers what is
honourable and just, and has no occasion for darkness.<note place='foot'>Hunc
ipsum annulum si habeat sapiens, nihilo plus sibi licere putet peccare,
quàm si non haberet. Honesta enim bonis viris, non occulta quæruntur. Lib. iii,
<hi rend='italic'>de offic.</hi> n. 38.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Gyges. A.M. 3286. Ant. J.C. 718.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Gyges</hi> reigned thirty-eight years.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. i. c. 13, 14.</note> The murder of Candaules
raised a sedition among the Lydians. The two
parties, instead of coming to blows, agreed to refer
the matter to the decision of the Delphic oracle,
which declared in favour of Gyges. The king made large
presents to the temple of Delphi, which undoubtedly preceded,
and had no little influence upon, the oracle's answer. Among
other things of value, Herodotus mentions six golden cups,
weighing thirty talents, amounting to near a million of French
money, which is about forty-eight thousand pounds sterling.
</p>

<p>
As soon as he was in peaceable possession of the throne, he
made war against Miletus, Smyrna, and Colophon, three
powerful cities belonging to the neighbouring states.
</p>

<p>
After he had reigned thirty-eight years, he died, and was
succeeded by his son
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ardys,</hi> who reigned forty-nine years.<note place='foot'>Ibid.
l. i. c. 15.</note> It was in the reign
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
of<note place='margin'>Ardys. A.M. 3334. Ant. J.C. 680.</note>
this prince, that the Cimmerians, driven out of
their country by the Scythæ Nomades, went into
Asia, and took the city of Sardis, with the exception
of the citadel.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sadyattes. A.M. 3373. Ant. J.C. 631.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sadyattes</hi> reigned twelve years.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. i. c. 16, 22.</note> This prince declared
war against the Milesians, and laid siege to their city.
In those days the sieges, which were generally
nothing more than blockades, were carried on very
slowly, and lasted many years. This king died before he had
finished that of Miletus, and was succeeded by his son.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Halyattes. A.M. 3385. Ant. J.C. 619.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Halyattes</hi> reigned fifty-seven years.<note place='foot'>Ibid.
c. 21, 22.</note> This is the prince
who made war against Cyaxares, king of Media. He
likewise drove the Cimmerians out of Asia. He
attacked and took the cities of Smyrna and Clazomenæ.
He vigorously prosecuted the war against the Milesians,
begun by his father; and continued the siege of their city,
which had lasted six years under his father, and continued as
many under him. It ended at length in the following manner:
Halyattes, upon an answer he received from the Delphic oracle,
had sent an ambassador into the city, to propose a truce
for some months. Thrasybulus, Tyrant of Miletus, having
notice of his coming, ordered all the corn, and other provisions,
assembled by him and his subjects for their support, to be
brought into the public market; and commanded the citizens,
at the sight of a signal that should be given, to be all in
a general humour of feasting and jollity. The thing was executed
according to his orders. The Lydian ambassador at his
arrival was in the utmost surprise to see such plenty in the
market, and such cheerfulness in the city. His master, to
whom he gave an account of what he had seen, concluding that
his project of reducing the place by famine would never succeed,
preferred peace to so apparently fruitless a war, and
immediately raised the siege.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Crœsus. A.M. 3442. Ant. J.C. 562.</note>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Crœsus.</hi> His very name, which is become a proverb, conveys
an idea of immense riches. The wealth of this
prince, to judge of it only by the presents he made
to the temple of Delphi, must have been excessively
great. Most of those presents were still to be seen in the time
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
of Herodotus, and were worth several millions. We may
partly account for the treasures of this prince, from certain
mines that he had, situate, according to Strabo, between Pergamus
and Atarna;<note place='foot'>Strab. l. xiii. p. 625.
&amp; l. xiv. p. 680.</note> as also from the little river Pactolus, the
sand of which was gold. But in Strabo's time this river had no
longer the same advantage.
</p>

<p>
What is very extraordinary, this affluence did not enervate
or soften the courage of Crœsus.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. i. c. 26-28.</note> He thought it unworthy
of a prince to spend his time in idleness and pleasure. For his
part, he was perpetually in arms, made several conquests, and
enlarged his dominions by the addition of all the contiguous
provinces, as Phrygia, Mysia, Paphlagonia, Bithynia, Pamphylia,
and all the country of the Carians, Ionians, Dorians, and
Æolians. Herodotus observes, that he was the first conqueror
of the Greeks, who till then had never been subject to a foreign
power. Doubtless he must mean the Greeks settled in Asia
Minor.
</p>

<p>
But what is still more extraordinary in this prince, though he
was so immensely rich, and so great a warrior, yet his chief
delight was in literature and the sciences. His court was the
ordinary residence of those famous learned men, so revered by
antiquity, and distinguished by the name of the Seven Wise
Men of Greece.
</p>

<p>
Solon, one of the most celebrated amongst them, after
having established new laws at Athens, thought he might
absent himself for some years, and improve that time by
travelling.<note place='foot'>Ibid. l. i. c. 29-33. Plut.
<hi rend='italic'>in Sol.</hi> p. 93, 94.</note>
He went to Sardis, where he was received in a manner
suitable to the reputation of so great a man. The king,
attended with a numerous court, appeared in all his regal
pomp and splendour, dressed in the most magnificent apparel,
which was all over enriched with gold, and glittered with diamonds.
Notwithstanding the novelty of this spectacle to Solon,
it did not appear that he was the least moved at it, nor did he
utter a word which discovered the least surprise or admiration;
on the contrary, people of sense might sufficiently discern from
his behaviour, that he looked upon all this outward pomp, as
an indication of a little mind, which knows not in what true
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
greatness and dignity consist. This coldness and indifference
in Solon's first approach, gave the king no favourable opinion
of his new guest.
</p>

<p>
He afterwards ordered that all his treasures, his magnificent
apartments, and costly furniture, should be showed him; as if
he expected, by the multitude of his fine vessels, jewels, statues,
and paintings, to conquer the philosopher's indifference.
But these things were not the king; and it was the king that
Solon was come to visit, and not the walls and chambers of his
palace. He had no notion of making a judgment of the king,
or an estimate of his worth, by these outward appendages, but
by himself and his own personal qualities. Were we to judge
at present by the same rule, we should find many of our great
men wretchedly naked and desolate.
</p>

<p>
When Solon had seen all, he was brought back to the king.
Crœsus then asked him, which of mankind in all his travels he
had found the most truly happy? <q>One Tellus,</q> replied Solon,
<q>a citizen of Athens, a very honest and good man, who, after
having lived all his days without indigence, having always seen
his country in a flourishing condition, has left children that
are universally esteemed, has had the satisfaction of seeing
those children's children, and at last died gloriously in fighting
for his country.</q>
</p>

<p>
Such an answer as this, in which gold and silver were
accounted as nothing, seemed to Crœsus to denote a strange
ignorance and stupidity. However, as he flattered himself that
he should be ranked at least in the second degree of happiness,
he asked him, <q>Who, of all those he had seen, was the next in
felicity to Tellus?</q> Solon answered, <q>Cleobis and Biton, of
Argos, two brothers,<note place='foot'>Φιλαδελφοὺς καὶ φιλομήτορας
διαφερόντως ἄνδρας.&mdash;Trans.</note> who had left behind them a perfect pattern
of fraternal affection, and of the respect due from children
to their parents. Upon a solemn festival, when their mother,
a priestess of Juno, was to go to the temple, the oxen that
were to draw her not being ready, the two sons put themselves
to the yoke, and drew their mother's chariot thither, which
was above five miles distant. All the mothers of the place,
ravished with admiration, congratulated the priestess on being
the mother of such sons. She, in the transports of her joy
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
and thankfulness, earnestly entreated the goddess to reward
her children with the best thing that heaven can give to man.
Her prayers were heard. When the sacrifice was over, her
two sons fell asleep in the very temple, and there died<note place='foot'>The
fatigue of drawing the chariot might be the cause of it.&mdash;Trans.</note> in a
soft and peaceful slumber. In honour of their piety, the
people of Argos consecrated statues to them in the temple of
Delphi.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What then,</q> says Crœsus, in a tone that showed his discontent,
<q>you do not reckon me in the number of the happy?</q>
Solon, who was not willing either to flatter or exasperate him
any further, replied calmly: <q>King of Lydia, besides many
other advantages, the gods have given us Grecians a spirit of
moderation and reserve, which has produced amongst us a plain,
popular kind of philosophy, accompanied with a certain generous
freedom, void of pride or ostentation, and therefore not
well suited to the courts of kings: this philosophy, considering
what an infinite number of vicissitudes and accidents the life of
man is liable to, does not allow us either to glory in any prosperity
we enjoy ourselves, or to admire happiness in others,
which perhaps may prove only transient, or superficial.</q> From
hence he took occasion to represent to him further, <q>That the
life of man seldom exceeds seventy years, which make up in all
six thousand two hundred and fifty days, of which no two are
exactly alike; so that the time to come is nothing but a series
of various accidents, which cannot be foreseen. Therefore, in
our opinion,</q> continued he, <q>no man can be esteemed happy,
but he whose happiness God continues to the end of his life:
as for others, who are perpetually exposed to a thousand dangers,
we account their happiness as uncertain as the crown is
to a person that is still engaged in battle, and has not yet
obtained the victory.</q> Solon retired, when he had spoken
these words,<note place='foot'>Λυπήσας μὲν, οὐ νουθετήσας δὲ τὸν
Κροίσον.&mdash;Trans.</note> which served only to mortify Crœsus, but not
to reform him.
</p>

<p>
Æsop, the author of the Fables, was then at the court of
this prince, by whom he was very kindly entertained. He was
concerned at the unhandsome treatment Solon received, and
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
said to him by way of advice: <q>Solon, we must either not
come near princes at all, or speak things that are agreeable to
them.</q> <q>Say rather,</q> replied Solon, <q>that we should either
never come near them at all, or else speak such things as may
be for their good.</q><note place='foot'>Ὦ Σόλων (ἔφη) τοῖς
βασιλεῦσι δεῖ ὡς ἥκιστα ἤ ὡς ἥδιστα ὁμιλεῖν.
Καὶ ό Σόλων, Μὴ Δί (εἶπεν) ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ἥκιστα ἥ ὡς ἄριστα.
The jingle of the words ὡς ἥκιστα ἥ ὡς ἄριστα,
which is a beauty in the original, because it is founded in the sense, cannot be
rendered into any other language.&mdash;Trans.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Plutarch's time some of the learned were of opinion, that
this interview between Solon and Crœsus did not agree with
the dates of chronology. But as those dates are very uncertain,
that judicious author did not think this objection ought to
prevail against the authority of several credible writers, by
whom this story is attested.
</p>

<p>
What we have now related of Crœsus is a very natural
picture of the behaviour of kings and great men, who for the
most part are seduced by flattery; and shows us at the same
time the two sources from whence that blindness generally
proceeds. The one is, a secret inclination which all men have,
but especially the great, of receiving praise without any
precaution, and of judging favourably of all that admire them,
and show an unlimited submission and complaisance to their
humours. The other is, the great resemblance there is between
flattery and a sincere affection, or a reasonable respect; which
is sometimes counterfeited so exactly, that the wisest may be
deceived, if they are not very much upon their guard.
</p>

<p>
Crœsus, if we judge of him by the character he bears in
history, was a very good prince, and worthy of esteem in many
respects. He had a great deal of good-nature, affability, and
humanity. His palace was a receptacle for men of wit and
learning, which shows that he himself was a person of learning,
and had a taste for the sciences. His weakness was, that he
laid too great stress upon riches and magnificence, thought
himself great and happy in proportion to his possessions,
mistook regal pomp and splendour for true and solid greatness,
and fed his vanity with the excessive submissions of those that
stood in a kind of adoration before him.
</p>

<p>
Those learned men, those wits and other courtiers, that
surrounded this prince, ate at his table, partook of his pleasures,
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
shared his confidence, and enriched themselves by his bounty
and liberality, took care not to thwart the prince's taste, and
never thought of undeceiving him with respect to his errors or
false ideas. On the contrary, they made it their business to
cherish and fortify them in him, extolling him perpetually as
the most opulent prince of his age, and never speaking of his
wealth, or the magnificence of his palace, but in terms of
admiration and rapture; because they knew this was the sure
way to please him, and to secure his favour. For flattery is
nothing else but a commerce of falsehood and lying, founded
upon interest on one side, and vanity on the other. The
flatterer desirous to advance himself, and make his fortune;
the prince to be praised and admired, because he is his own
first flatterer, and carries within himself a more subtile and
better prepared poison than any adulation gives him.
</p>

<p>
That maxim of Æsop, who had formerly been a slave, and
still retained somewhat of the spirit and character of slavery,
though he had varnished it over with the address of an artful
courtier; that maxim of his, I say, which recommended to
Solon, <q>That we should either not come near kings, or say
what is agreeable to them,</q> shows us with what kind of men
Crœsus had filled his court, and by what means he had banished
all sincerity, integrity, and duty, from his presence. In consequence
of which, we see he could not bear that noble and
generous freedom in the philosopher, upon which he ought to
have set an infinite value; as he would have done, had he but
understood the worth of a friend, who, attaching himself to the
person, and not to the fortune of a prince, has the courage to
tell him disagreeable truths; truths unpalatable, and bitter to
self-love at the present, but that may prove very salutary and
serviceable for the future. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dic illis, non quod volunt
audire, sed quod audisse semper volent.</foreign> These are Seneca's own
words, where he is endeavouring to show of what great use a
faithful and sincere friend may be to a prince; and what he
adds further seems to be written on purpose for Crœsus:
<q>Give him,</q><note place='foot'>Plenas aures adulationibus aliquando vera vox intret:
da consilium utile. Quæris, quid felici præstare possis? Effice, ne felicitati suæ
credat. Parum in illum contuleris, si illi semel stultam fiduciam permansuræ semper
potentiæ excusseris, docuerisque mobilia esse quæ dedit casus; ac sæpe inter fortunam
maximam et ultimam nihil interesse. Sen. <hi rend='italic'>de benef.</hi> l. vi. c.
33.&mdash;Trans.</note> says he, <q>wholesome advice. Let a word of
<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>
truth once reach those ears, which are perpetually fed and
entertained with flattery. You will ask me, what service can
be done to a person arrived at the highest pitch of felicity?
That of teaching him not to trust in his prosperity; of removing
that vain confidence he has in his power and greatness, as
if they were to endure for ever; of making him understand,
that every thing which belongs to and depends upon fortune, is
as unstable as herself; and that there is often but the space of
a moment between the highest elevation and the most unhappy
downfall.</q>
</p>

<p>
It was not long before Crœsus experienced the truth of
what Solon had told him.<note place='foot'>Herod. l.
i. c. 34-45.</note> He had two sons, one of which,
being dumb, was a perpetual subject of affliction to him; the
other, named Atys, was distinguished by every good quality,
and his great consolation and delight. The father one night
had a dream, which made a great impression upon his mind,
that this beloved son of his was to perish by iron. This
became a new source of anxiety and trouble, and care is taken
to remove out of the young prince's way every thing made of
iron, as partisans, lances, javelins, &amp;c. No mention is made
of armies, wars, or sieges, before him. But one day there was
to be an extraordinary hunting-match, for the killing of a wild
boar, which had committed great ravage in the neighbourhood.
All the young lords of the court were to be at this hunting.
Atys very earnestly importuned his father that he would give
him leave to be present, at least as a spectator. The king
could not refuse him that request, but intrusted him to the
care of a discreet young prince, who had taken refuge in his
court, and was named Adrastus. And this very Adrastus, as
he was aiming his javelin at the boar, unfortunately killed
Atys. It is impossible to express either the affliction of the
father, when he heard of this fatal accident, or of the unhappy
prince, the innocent author of the murder, who expiated his
fault with his blood, stabbing himself in the breast with his
own sword, upon the funeral pile of the unfortunate Atys.
</p>

<p>
Two years were spent on this occasion in deep mourning,<note place='foot'>Ibid.
46-50.</note>
<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>
the afflicted father's thoughts being wholly taken up with the
loss he had sustained. But the growing reputation, and great
qualities of Cyrus, who began to make himself known, roused
him out of his lethargy. He thought it behoved him to put
a stop to the power of the Persians, which was enlarging itself
every day. As he was very religious in his way, he would
never enter upon any enterprise without consulting the gods.
But, that he might not act blindly, and in order to be able to
form a certain judgment on the answers he should receive, he
was willing to assure himself beforehand of the truth of the
oracles. For which purpose, he sent messengers to all the
most celebrated oracles both of Greece and Africa, with orders
to inquire, every one at his respective oracle, what Crœsus was
doing on such a day, and such an hour, before agreed on. His
orders were punctually observed; and of all the oracles none
gave a true answer but that of Delphi. The answer was given
in Greek hexameter verses, and was in substance as follows:
<q>I know the number of the grains of sand on the sea-shore, and
the measure of the ocean's vast extent. I can hear the dumb,
and him that has not yet learnt to speak. A strong smell of
a tortoise boiled in brass, together with sheep's flesh, has reached
my nostrils, brass beneath, brass above.</q> And indeed the king,
thinking to invent something that could not possibly be guessed
at, had employed himself on the day and hour set down, in
boiling a tortoise and a lamb in a brass pot, which had a brass
cover. St. Austin observes in several places, that God, to
punish the blindness of the Pagans, sometimes permitted the
devils to give answers conformable to the truth.
</p>

<p>
Crœsus, thus assured of the veracity of the god whom he
designed to consult, offered three thousand victims to his
honour, and ordered an infinite number of vessels, tripods, and
golden tables, to be melted down, and converted into ingots of
gold, to the number of a hundred and seventeen, to augment
the treasures of the temple of Delphi. Each of these ingots
weighed at least two talents; besides which, he made several
other presents: amongst others Herodotus mentions a golden
lion, weighing ten talents, and two vessels of an extraordinary
size, one of gold, which weighed eight talents and a half and
twelve minæ; the other of silver, which contained six hundred
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
of the measures called amphoræ. All these presents, and
many more, which for brevity's sake I omit, were to be seen in
the time of Herodotus.
</p>

<p>
The messengers were ordered to consult the god upon two
points: first, whether Crœsus should undertake a war against
the Persians; secondly, if he did, whether he should require
the succour of any auxiliary troops. The oracle answered,
upon the first article, that if he carried his arms against the
Persians, he would subvert a great empire; upon the second,
that he would do well to make alliances with the most powerful
states of Greece. He consulted the oracle again, to know how
long the duration of his empire would be. The answer was,
that it should subsist till a mule came to possess the throne of
Media; which he considered as an assurance of the perpetual
duration of his kingdom.
</p>

<p>
Pursuant to the direction of the oracle, Crœsus entered into
alliance with the Athenians, who at that time had Pisistratus
at their head, and with the Lacedæmonians, who were indisputably
the two most powerful states of Greece.
</p>

<p>
A certain Lydian, much esteemed for his prudence, gave
Crœsus, on this occasion, very judicious advice.<note place='foot'>Herod.
l. i. c. 71.</note> <q>O prince,
(says he to him,) why do you think of turning your arms
against such a people as the Persians, who, being born in a
wild, rugged country, are inured from their infancy to every
kind of hardship and fatigue, who, being coarsely clad, and
coarsely fed, can content themselves with bread and water;
who are absolute strangers to all the delicacies and conveniencies
of life; who, in a word, have nothing to lose if you
conquer them, and every thing to gain if they conquer you;
and whom it would be difficult to drive out of our country, if
they should once come to taste the sweets and advantages of
it? So far therefore from thinking of beginning a war against
them, it is my opinion we ought to thank the gods that they
have never put it into the heads of the Persians to come and
attack the Lydians.</q> But Crœsus had taken his resolution
and would not be diverted from it.
</p>

<p>
What remains of the history of Crœsus will be found in that
of Cyrus, which I am now going to begin.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Maps.</head>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-i-a.png' rend='width: 100%'>
    <head rend='text-align: center'>Plate I, part A.</head>
    <figDesc>Map: The World.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-i-b.png' rend='width: 100%'>
    <head rend='text-align: center'>Plate I, part B.</head>
    <figDesc>Map: The World.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-ii-a.png' rend='width: 100%'>
    <head rend='text-align: center'>Plate II, part A.</head>
    <figDesc>Map: Egypt with Lybia.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-ii-b.png' rend='width: 100%'>
    <head rend='text-align: center'>Plate II, part B.</head>
    <figDesc>Map: Egypt with Lybia.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-iii-a.png' rend='width: 100%'>
    <head rend='text-align: center'>Plate III, part A.</head>
    <figDesc>Map: The Carthaginian Empire in Africa.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-iii-b.png' rend='width: 100%'>
    <head rend='text-align: center'>Plate III, part B.</head>
    <figDesc>Map: The Carthaginian Empire in Africa.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-iii-c.png' rend='width: 100%'>
    <head rend='text-align: center'>Plate III, part C.</head>
    <figDesc>Map: The Carthaginian Empire in Africa.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-iv-a.png' rend='width: 100%'>
    <head rend='text-align: center'>Plate IV, part A.</head>
    <figDesc>Map: The Expedition of Hannibal.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-iv-b.png' rend='width: 100%'>
    <head rend='text-align: center'>Plate IV, part B.</head>
    <figDesc>Map: The Expedition of Hannibal.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-iv-b.png' rend='width: 100%'>
    <head rend='text-align: center'>Plate IV, part B.</head>
    <figDesc>Map: The Expedition of Hannibal.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-v-a.png' rend='width: 100%'>
    <head rend='text-align: center'>Plate V, part A.</head>
    <figDesc>Map: The Assyrians, Babylonians, Medes and Persians.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-v-b.png' rend='width: 100%'>
    <head rend='text-align: center'>Plate V, part B.</head>
    <figDesc>Map: The Assyrians, Babylonians, Medes and Persians.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

</div>
</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
